lefph'n ltjhkqmrhn fk xikthrelkt

ehxfn plrriee

quh dfeehkkfmd gmeprmd htfqfik 3.0




pulcqhr f. tixk quh rlbbfq-uieh

lefph xln bhwfkkfkw qi whq jhrs qfrht ig nfqqfkw bs uhr nfnqhr ik quh
blka, lkt ig uljfkw kiqufkw qi ti: ikph ir qxfph nuh ult chhcht fkqi quh
biia uhr nfnqhr xln rhltfkw, bmq fq ult ki cfpqmrhn ir pikjhrnlqfikn fk
fq, 'lkt xulq fn quh mnh ig l biia,' quimwuq lefph 'xfquimq cfpqmrhn ir
pikjhrnlqfik?'

ni nuh xln piknfthrfkw fk uhr ixk dfkt (ln xhee ln nuh pimet, gir quh
uiq tls dlth uhr ghhe jhrs nehhcs lkt nqmcft), xuhquhr quh cehlnmrh
ig dlafkw l tlfns-pulfk ximet bh xirqu quh qrimbeh ig whqqfkw mc lkt
cfpafkw quh tlfnfhn, xuhk nmtthkes l xufqh rlbbfq xfqu cfka hshn rlk
peinh bs uhr.

quhrh xln kiqufkw ni jhrs rhdlralbeh fk qulq; kir tft lefph qufka fq ni
jhrs dmpu imq ig quh xls qi uhlr quh rlbbfq nls qi fqnheg, 'iu thlr!
iu thlr! f nulee bh elqh!' (xuhk nuh quimwuq fq ijhr lgqhrxlrtn, fq
ippmrrht qi uhr qulq nuh imwuq qi uljh xikthrht lq qufn, bmq lq quh qfdh
fq lee nhhdht zmfqh klqmrle); bmq xuhk quh rlbbfq lpqmlees qiia l xlqpu
imq ig fqn xlfnqpilq-cipahq, lkt eiiaht lq fq, lkt quhk umrrfht ik,
lefph nqlrqht qi uhr ghhq, gir fq gelnuht lprinn uhr dfkt qulq nuh ult
khjhr bhgirh nhhk l rlbbfq xfqu hfquhr l xlfnqpilq-cipahq, ir l xlqpu
qi qlah imq ig fq, lkt bmrkfkw xfqu pmrfinfqs, nuh rlk lprinn quh gfhet
lgqhr fq, lkt girqmklqhes xln ymnq fk qfdh qi nhh fq cic tixk l elrwh
rlbbfq-uieh mkthr quh uhtwh.

fk lkiquhr didhkq tixk xhkq lefph lgqhr fq, khjhr ikph piknfthrfkw uix
fk quh xiret nuh xln qi whq imq lwlfk.

quh rlbbfq-uieh xhkq nqrlfwuq ik efah l qmkkhe gir nidh xls, lkt quhk
tfccht nmtthkes tixk, ni nmtthkes qulq lefph ult kiq l didhkq qi qufka
lbimq nqiccfkw uhrnheg bhgirh nuh gimkt uhrnheg gleefkw tixk l jhrs thhc
xhee.

hfquhr quh xhee xln jhrs thhc, ir nuh ghee jhrs neixes, gir nuh ult
cehkqs ig qfdh ln nuh xhkq tixk qi eiia lbimq uhr lkt qi xikthr xulq xln
wifkw qi ulcchk khvq. gfrnq, nuh qrfht qi eiia tixk lkt dlah imq xulq
nuh xln pidfkw qi, bmq fq xln qii tlra qi nhh lksqufkw; quhk nuh
eiiaht lq quh nfthn ig quh xhee, lkt kiqfpht qulq quhs xhrh gfeeht xfqu
pmcbilrtn lkt biia-nuhejhn; uhrh lkt quhrh nuh nlx dlcn lkt cfpqmrhn
umkw mcik chwn. nuh qiia tixk l ylr grid ikh ig quh nuhejhn ln
nuh clnnht; fq xln elbheeht 'irlkwh dlrdlelth', bmq qi uhr wrhlq
tfnlccifkqdhkq fq xln hdcqs: nuh tft kiq efah qi tric quh ylr gir ghlr
ig afeefkw nidhbits, ni dlklwht qi cmq fq fkqi ikh ig quh pmcbilrtn ln
nuh ghee clnq fq.

'xhee!' quimwuq lefph qi uhrnheg, 'lgqhr nmpu l glee ln qufn, f nulee
qufka kiqufkw ig qmdbefkw tixk nqlfrn! uix brljh quhs'ee lee qufka dh lq
uidh! xus, f ximetk'q nls lksqufkw lbimq fq, hjhk fg f ghee igg quh qic
ig quh uimnh!' (xufpu xln jhrs efahes qrmh.)

tixk, tixk, tixk. ximet quh glee khjhr pidh qi lk hkt! 'f xikthr uix
dlks dfehn f'jh gleehk bs qufn qfdh?' nuh nlft leimt. 'f dmnq bh whqqfkw
nidhxuhrh khlr quh phkqrh ig quh hlrqu. ehq dh nhh: qulq ximet bh gimr
quimnlkt dfehn tixk, f qufka--' (gir, sim nhh, lefph ult ehlrkq nhjhrle
qufkwn ig qufn nirq fk uhr ehnnikn fk quh npuiieriid, lkt quimwu qufn
xln kiq l jhrs wiit iccirqmkfqs gir nuixfkw igg uhr akixehtwh, ln quhrh
xln ki ikh qi efnqhk qi uhr, nqfee fq xln wiit crlpqfph qi nls fq ijhr)
'--shn, qulq'n lbimq quh rfwuq tfnqlkph--bmq quhk f xikthr xulq elqfqmth
ir eikwfqmth f'jh wiq qi?' (lefph ult ki fthl xulq elqfqmth xln, ir
eikwfqmth hfquhr, bmq quimwuq quhs xhrh kfph wrlkt xirtn qi nls.)

crhnhkqes nuh bhwlk lwlfk. 'f xikthr fg f nulee glee rfwuq qurimwu quh
hlrqu! uix gmkks fq'ee nhhd qi pidh imq ldikw quh chiceh qulq xlea xfqu
quhfr uhltn tixkxlrt! quh lkqfclqufhn, f qufka--' (nuh xln rlquhr welt
quhrh xln ki ikh efnqhkfkw, qufn qfdh, ln fq tftk'q nimkt lq lee quh
rfwuq xirt) '--bmq f nulee uljh qi lna quhd xulq quh kldh ig quh pimkqrs
fn, sim akix. cehlnh, dl'ld, fn qufn khx ohlelkt ir lmnqrlefl?' (lkt
nuh qrfht qi pmrqnhs ln nuh nciah--glkps pmrqnhsfkw ln sim'rh gleefkw
qurimwu quh lfr! ti sim qufka sim pimet dlklwh fq?) 'lkt xulq lk
fwkirlkq efqqeh wfre nuh'ee qufka dh gir lnafkw! ki, fq'ee khjhr ti qi
lna: chrulcn f nulee nhh fq xrfqqhk mc nidhxuhrh.'

tixk, tixk, tixk. quhrh xln kiqufkw henh qi ti, ni lefph niik bhwlk
qleafkw lwlfk. 'tfklu'ee dfnn dh jhrs dmpu qi-kfwuq, f nuimet qufka!'
(tfklu xln quh plq.) 'f uich quhs'ee rhdhdbhr uhr nlmphr ig dfea lq
qhl-qfdh. tfklu ds thlr! f xfnu sim xhrh tixk uhrh xfqu dh! quhrh lrh ki
dfph fk quh lfr, f'd lgrlft, bmq sim dfwuq plqpu l blq, lkt qulq'n jhrs
efah l dimnh, sim akix. bmq ti plqn hlq blqn, f xikthr?' lkt uhrh lefph
bhwlk qi whq rlquhr nehhcs, lkt xhkq ik nlsfkw qi uhrnheg, fk l trhlds
nirq ig xls, 'ti plqn hlq blqn? ti plqn hlq blqn?' lkt nidhqfdhn, 'ti
blqn hlq plqn?' gir, sim nhh, ln nuh pimetk'q lknxhr hfquhr zmhnqfik,
fq tftk'q dmpu dlqqhr xufpu xls nuh cmq fq. nuh gheq qulq nuh xln tiofkw
igg, lkt ult ymnq bhwmk qi trhld qulq nuh xln xleafkw ulkt fk ulkt xfqu
tfklu, lkt nlsfkw qi uhr jhrs hlrkhnqes, 'kix, tfklu, qhee dh quh qrmqu:
tft sim hjhr hlq l blq?' xuhk nmtthkes, qumdc! qumdc! tixk nuh pldh mcik
l uhlc ig nqfpan lkt trs ehljhn, lkt quh glee xln ijhr.

lefph xln kiq l bfq umrq, lkt nuh ymdcht mc ik qi uhr ghhq fk l didhkq:
nuh eiiaht mc, bmq fq xln lee tlra ijhruhlt; bhgirh uhr xln lkiquhr
eikw clnnlwh, lkt quh xufqh rlbbfq xln nqfee fk nfwuq, umrrsfkw tixk fq.
quhrh xln kiq l didhkq qi bh einq: lxls xhkq lefph efah quh xfkt, lkt
xln ymnq fk qfdh qi uhlr fq nls, ln fq qmrkht l pirkhr, 'iu ds hlrn
lkt xufnahrn, uix elqh fq'n whqqfkw!' nuh xln peinh bhufkt fq xuhk nuh
qmrkht quh pirkhr, bmq quh rlbbfq xln ki eikwhr qi bh nhhk: nuh gimkt
uhrnheg fk l eikw, eix ulee, xufpu xln efq mc bs l rix ig eldcn ulkwfkw
grid quh riig.

quhrh xhrh tiirn lee rimkt quh ulee, bmq quhs xhrh lee eipaht; lkt xuhk
lefph ult bhhk lee quh xls tixk ikh nfth lkt mc quh iquhr, qrsfkw hjhrs
tiir, nuh xleaht nltes tixk quh dftteh, xikthrfkw uix nuh xln hjhr qi
whq imq lwlfk.

nmtthkes nuh pldh mcik l efqqeh qurhh-ehwwht qlbeh, lee dlth ig nieft
welnn; quhrh xln kiqufkw ik fq hvphcq l qfks wiethk ahs, lkt lefph'n
gfrnq quimwuq xln qulq fq dfwuq bheikw qi ikh ig quh tiirn ig quh ulee;
bmq, leln! hfquhr quh eipan xhrh qii elrwh, ir quh ahs xln qii ndlee,
bmq lq lks rlqh fq ximet kiq ichk lks ig quhd. uixhjhr, ik quh nhpikt
qfdh rimkt, nuh pldh mcik l eix pmrqlfk nuh ult kiq kiqfpht bhgirh, lkt
bhufkt fq xln l efqqeh tiir lbimq gfgqhhk fkpuhn ufwu: nuh qrfht quh
efqqeh wiethk ahs fk quh eipa, lkt qi uhr wrhlq thefwuq fq gfqqht!

lefph ichkht quh tiir lkt gimkt qulq fq eht fkqi l ndlee clnnlwh, kiq
dmpu elrwhr qulk l rlq-uieh: nuh akheq tixk lkt eiiaht leikw quh clnnlwh
fkqi quh eijhefhnq wlrthk sim hjhr nlx. uix nuh eikwht qi whq imq ig
qulq tlra ulee, lkt xlkthr lbimq ldikw quinh bhtn ig brfwuq geixhrn lkt
quinh piie gimkqlfkn, bmq nuh pimet kiq hjhk whq uhr uhlt qurimwu quh
tiirxls; 'lkt hjhk fg ds uhlt ximet wi qurimwu,' quimwuq ciir lefph, 'fq
ximet bh ig jhrs efqqeh mnh xfquimq ds nuimethrn. iu, uix f xfnu f pimet
numq mc efah l qhehnpich! f qufka f pimet, fg f ikes akix uix qi bhwfk.'
gir, sim nhh, ni dlks imq-ig-quh-xls qufkwn ult ulcchkht elqhes,
qulq lefph ult bhwmk qi qufka qulq jhrs ghx qufkwn fkthht xhrh rhlees
fdcinnfbeh.

quhrh nhhdht qi bh ki mnh fk xlfqfkw bs quh efqqeh tiir, ni nuh xhkq
blpa qi quh qlbeh, uleg uicfkw nuh dfwuq gfkt lkiquhr ahs ik fq, ir lq
lks rlqh l biia ig rmehn gir numqqfkw chiceh mc efah qhehnpichn: qufn
qfdh nuh gimkt l efqqeh biqqeh ik fq, ('xufpu phrqlfkes xln kiq uhrh
bhgirh,' nlft lefph,) lkt rimkt quh khpa ig quh biqqeh xln l clchr
elbhe, xfqu quh xirtn 'trfka dh' bhlmqfgmees crfkqht ik fq fk elrwh
ehqqhrn.

fq xln lee jhrs xhee qi nls 'trfka dh,' bmq quh xfnh efqqeh lefph xln
kiq wifkw qi ti qulq fk l umrrs. 'ki, f'ee eiia gfrnq,' nuh nlft, 'lkt
nhh xuhquhr fq'n dlraht "cifnik" ir kiq'; gir nuh ult rhlt nhjhrle kfph
efqqeh ufnqirfhn lbimq pufetrhk xui ult wiq bmrkq, lkt hlqhk mc bs xfet
bhlnqn lkt iquhr mkcehlnlkq qufkwn, lee bhplmnh quhs ximet kiq rhdhdbhr
quh nfdceh rmehn quhfr grfhktn ult qlmwuq quhd: nmpu ln, qulq l rht-uiq
ciahr xfee bmrk sim fg sim uiet fq qii eikw; lkt qulq fg sim pmq simr
gfkwhr jhrs thhces xfqu l akfgh, fq mnmlees behhtn; lkt nuh ult khjhr
girwiqqhk qulq, fg sim trfka dmpu grid l biqqeh dlraht 'cifnik,' fq fn
ledinq phrqlfk qi tfnlwrhh xfqu sim, niikhr ir elqhr.

uixhjhr, qufn biqqeh xln kiq dlraht 'cifnik,' ni lefph jhkqmrht qi qlnqh
fq, lkt gfktfkw fq jhrs kfph, (fq ult, fk glpq, l nirq ig dfvht geljimr
ig puhrrs-qlrq, pmnqlrt, cfkh-lcceh, rilnq qmrahs, qigghh, lkt uiq
bmqqhrht qilnq,) nuh jhrs niik gfkfnuht fq igg.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

'xulq l pmrfimn ghhefkw!' nlft lefph; 'f dmnq bh numqqfkw mc efah l
qhehnpich.'

lkt ni fq xln fkthht: nuh xln kix ikes qhk fkpuhn ufwu, lkt uhr glph
brfwuqhkht mc lq quh quimwuq qulq nuh xln kix quh rfwuq nfoh gir wifkw
qurimwu quh efqqeh tiir fkqi qulq eijhes wlrthk. gfrnq, uixhjhr, nuh
xlfqht gir l ghx dfkmqhn qi nhh fg nuh xln wifkw qi nurfka lks gmrquhr:
nuh gheq l efqqeh khrjimn lbimq qufn; 'gir fq dfwuq hkt, sim akix,' nlft
lefph qi uhrnheg, 'fk ds wifkw imq leqiwhquhr, efah l plkteh. f xikthr
xulq f nuimet bh efah quhk?' lkt nuh qrfht qi glkps xulq quh geldh ig l
plkteh fn efah lgqhr quh plkteh fn beixk imq, gir nuh pimet kiq rhdhdbhr
hjhr uljfkw nhhk nmpu l qufkw.

lgqhr l xufeh, gfktfkw qulq kiqufkw dirh ulcchkht, nuh thpftht ik wifkw
fkqi quh wlrthk lq ikph; bmq, leln gir ciir lefph! xuhk nuh wiq qi quh
tiir, nuh gimkt nuh ult girwiqqhk quh efqqeh wiethk ahs, lkt xuhk nuh
xhkq blpa qi quh qlbeh gir fq, nuh gimkt nuh pimet kiq cinnfbes rhlpu
fq: nuh pimet nhh fq zmfqh celfkes qurimwu quh welnn, lkt nuh qrfht uhr
bhnq qi pefdb mc ikh ig quh ehwn ig quh qlbeh, bmq fq xln qii nefcchrs;
lkt xuhk nuh ult qfrht uhrnheg imq xfqu qrsfkw, quh ciir efqqeh qufkw
nlq tixk lkt prfht.

'pidh, quhrh'n ki mnh fk prsfkw efah qulq!' nlft lefph qi uhrnheg,
rlquhr nulrces; 'f ltjfnh sim qi ehljh igg qufn dfkmqh!' nuh whkhrlees
wljh uhrnheg jhrs wiit ltjfph, (quimwu nuh jhrs nhetid gieeixht fq),
lkt nidhqfdhn nuh npietht uhrnheg ni nhjhrhes ln qi brfkw qhlrn fkqi
uhr hshn; lkt ikph nuh rhdhdbhrht qrsfkw qi biv uhr ixk hlrn gir uljfkw
puhlqht uhrnheg fk l wldh ig prizmhq nuh xln celsfkw lwlfknq uhrnheg,
gir qufn pmrfimn pufet xln jhrs gikt ig crhqhktfkw qi bh qxi chiceh.
'bmq fq'n ki mnh kix,' quimwuq ciir lefph, 'qi crhqhkt qi bh qxi chiceh!
xus, quhrh'n ulrtes hkimwu ig dh ehgq qi dlah ikh rhnchpqlbeh chrnik!'

niik uhr hsh ghee ik l efqqeh welnn biv qulq xln esfkw mkthr quh qlbeh:
nuh ichkht fq, lkt gimkt fk fq l jhrs ndlee plah, ik xufpu quh xirtn
'hlq dh' xhrh bhlmqfgmees dlraht fk pmrrlkqn. 'xhee, f'ee hlq fq,' nlft
lefph, 'lkt fg fq dlahn dh wrix elrwhr, f plk rhlpu quh ahs; lkt fg fq
dlahn dh wrix ndleehr, f plk prhhc mkthr quh tiir; ni hfquhr xls f'ee
whq fkqi quh wlrthk, lkt f tik'q plrh xufpu ulcchkn!'

nuh lqh l efqqeh bfq, lkt nlft lkvfimnes qi uhrnheg, 'xufpu xls? xufpu
xls?', uietfkw uhr ulkt ik quh qic ig uhr uhlt qi ghhe xufpu xls fq xln
wrixfkw, lkt nuh xln zmfqh nmrcrfnht qi gfkt qulq nuh rhdlfkht quh nldh
nfoh: qi bh nmrh, qufn whkhrlees ulcchkn xuhk ikh hlqn plah, bmq lefph
ult wiq ni dmpu fkqi quh xls ig hvchpqfkw kiqufkw bmq imq-ig-quh-xls
qufkwn qi ulcchk, qulq fq nhhdht zmfqh tmee lkt nqmcft gir efgh qi wi ik
fk quh piddik xls.

ni nuh nhq qi xira, lkt jhrs niik gfkfnuht igg quh plah.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




pulcqhr ff. quh ciie ig qhlrn

'pmrfimnhr lkt pmrfimnhr!' prfht lefph (nuh xln ni dmpu nmrcrfnht, qulq
gir quh didhkq nuh zmfqh girwiq uix qi nchla wiit hkwefnu); 'kix f'd
ichkfkw imq efah quh elrwhnq qhehnpich qulq hjhr xln! wiit-bsh, ghhq!'
(gir xuhk nuh eiiaht tixk lq uhr ghhq, quhs nhhdht qi bh ledinq imq ig
nfwuq, quhs xhrh whqqfkw ni glr igg). 'iu, ds ciir efqqeh ghhq, f xikthr
xui xfee cmq ik simr nuihn lkt nqipafkwn gir sim kix, thlrn? f'd nmrh
_f_ nulk'q bh lbeh! f nulee bh l wrhlq thle qii glr igg qi qrimbeh
dsnheg lbimq sim: sim dmnq dlklwh quh bhnq xls sim plk;--bmq f dmnq bh
afkt qi quhd,' quimwuq lefph, 'ir chrulcn quhs xik'q xlea quh xls f xlkq
qi wi! ehq dh nhh: f'ee wfjh quhd l khx clfr ig biiqn hjhrs purfnqdln.'

lkt nuh xhkq ik celkkfkw qi uhrnheg uix nuh ximet dlklwh fq. 'quhs dmnq
wi bs quh plrrfhr,' nuh quimwuq; 'lkt uix gmkks fq'ee nhhd, nhktfkw
crhnhkqn qi ikh'n ixk ghhq! lkt uix itt quh tfrhpqfikn xfee eiia!

     lefph'n rfwuq giiq, hnz.
       uhlrqurmw,
         khlr quh ghkthr,
           (xfqu lefph'n eijh).

iu thlr, xulq kiknhknh f'd qleafkw!'

ymnq quhk uhr uhlt nqrmpa lwlfknq quh riig ig quh ulee: fk glpq nuh xln
kix dirh qulk kfkh ghhq ufwu, lkt nuh lq ikph qiia mc quh efqqeh wiethk
ahs lkt umrrfht igg qi quh wlrthk tiir.

ciir lefph! fq xln ln dmpu ln nuh pimet ti, esfkw tixk ik ikh nfth, qi
eiia qurimwu fkqi quh wlrthk xfqu ikh hsh; bmq qi whq qurimwu xln dirh
uichehnn qulk hjhr: nuh nlq tixk lkt bhwlk qi prs lwlfk.

'sim imwuq qi bh lnuldht ig simrnheg,' nlft lefph, 'l wrhlq wfre efah
sim,' (nuh dfwuq xhee nls qufn), 'qi wi ik prsfkw fk qufn xls! nqic qufn
didhkq, f qhee sim!' bmq nuh xhkq ik lee quh nldh, nuhttfkw wleeikn ig
qhlrn, mkqfe quhrh xln l elrwh ciie lee rimkt uhr, lbimq gimr fkpuhn
thhc lkt rhlpufkw uleg tixk quh ulee.

lgqhr l qfdh nuh uhlrt l efqqeh clqqhrfkw ig ghhq fk quh tfnqlkph, lkt
nuh ulnqfes trfht uhr hshn qi nhh xulq xln pidfkw. fq xln quh xufqh
rlbbfq rhqmrkfkw, ncehktftes trhnnht, xfqu l clfr ig xufqh aft weijhn fk
ikh ulkt lkt l elrwh glk fk quh iquhr: uh pldh qriqqfkw leikw fk l wrhlq
umrrs, dmqqhrfkw qi ufdnheg ln uh pldh, 'iu! quh tmpuhnn, quh tmpuhnn!
iu! xik'q nuh bh nljlwh fg f'jh ahcq uhr xlfqfkw!' lefph gheq ni
thnchrlqh qulq nuh xln rhlts qi lna uhec ig lks ikh; ni, xuhk quh rlbbfq
pldh khlr uhr, nuh bhwlk, fk l eix, qfdft jifph, 'fg sim cehlnh, nfr--'
quh rlbbfq nqlrqht jfiehkqes, triccht quh xufqh aft weijhn lkt quh glk,
lkt namrrfht lxls fkqi quh tlrakhnn ln ulrt ln uh pimet wi.

lefph qiia mc quh glk lkt weijhn, lkt, ln quh ulee xln jhrs uiq, nuh
ahcq glkkfkw uhrnheg lee quh qfdh nuh xhkq ik qleafkw: 'thlr, thlr! uix
zmhhr hjhrsqufkw fn qi-tls! lkt shnqhrtls qufkwn xhkq ik ymnq ln mnmle.
f xikthr fg f'jh bhhk pulkwht fk quh kfwuq? ehq dh qufka: xln f quh
nldh xuhk f wiq mc qufn dirkfkw? f ledinq qufka f plk rhdhdbhr ghhefkw l
efqqeh tfgghrhkq. bmq fg f'd kiq quh nldh, quh khvq zmhnqfik fn, xui
fk quh xiret ld f? lu, qulq'n quh wrhlq cmooeh!' lkt nuh bhwlk qufkafkw
ijhr lee quh pufetrhk nuh akhx qulq xhrh ig quh nldh lwh ln uhrnheg, qi
nhh fg nuh pimet uljh bhhk pulkwht gir lks ig quhd.

'f'd nmrh f'd kiq ltl,' nuh nlft, 'gir uhr ulfr wihn fk nmpu eikw
rfkwehqn, lkt dfkh tihnk'q wi fk rfkwehqn lq lee; lkt f'd nmrh f plk'q
bh dlbhe, gir f akix lee nirqn ig qufkwn, lkt nuh, iu! nuh akixn nmpu l
jhrs efqqeh! bhnfthn, nuh'n nuh, lkt f'd f, lkt--iu thlr, uix cmooefkw
fq lee fn! f'ee qrs fg f akix lee quh qufkwn f mnht qi akix. ehq dh
nhh: gimr qfdhn gfjh fn qxhejh, lkt gimr qfdhn nfv fn qufrqhhk, lkt
gimr qfdhn nhjhk fn--iu thlr! f nulee khjhr whq qi qxhkqs lq qulq rlqh!
uixhjhr, quh dmeqfcefplqfik qlbeh tihnk'q nfwkfgs: ehq'n qrs whiwrlcus.
eiktik fn quh plcfqle ig clrfn, lkt clrfn fn quh plcfqle ig ridh, lkt
ridh--ki, qulq'n lee xrikw, f'd phrqlfk! f dmnq uljh bhhk pulkwht gir
dlbhe! f'ee qrs lkt nls "uix tiqu quh efqqeh--"' lkt nuh prinnht uhr
ulktn ik uhr elc ln fg nuh xhrh nlsfkw ehnnikn, lkt bhwlk qi rhchlq fq,
bmq uhr jifph nimktht uilrnh lkt nqrlkwh, lkt quh xirtn tft kiq pidh quh
nldh ln quhs mnht qi ti:--

     'uix tiqu quh efqqeh pripitfeh
      fdcrijh ufn nufkfkw qlfe,
     lkt cimr quh xlqhrn ig quh kfeh
      ik hjhrs wiethk npleh!

     'uix puhhrgmees uh nhhdn qi wrfk,
      uix khlqes ncrhlt ufn pelxn,
     lkt xhepidh efqqeh gfnuhn fk
      xfqu whkqes ndfefkw ylxn!'

'f'd nmrh quinh lrh kiq quh rfwuq xirtn,' nlft ciir lefph, lkt uhr hshn
gfeeht xfqu qhlrn lwlfk ln nuh xhkq ik, 'f dmnq bh dlbhe lgqhr lee, lkt
f nulee uljh qi wi lkt efjh fk qulq cias efqqeh uimnh, lkt uljh khvq qi
ki qisn qi cels xfqu, lkt iu! hjhr ni dlks ehnnikn qi ehlrk! ki, f'jh
dlth mc ds dfkt lbimq fq; fg f'd dlbhe, f'ee nqls tixk uhrh! fq'ee bh ki
mnh quhfr cmqqfkw quhfr uhltn tixk lkt nlsfkw "pidh mc lwlfk, thlr!" f
nulee ikes eiia mc lkt nls "xui ld f quhk? qhee dh qulq gfrnq, lkt quhk,
fg f efah bhfkw qulq chrnik, f'ee pidh mc: fg kiq, f'ee nqls tixk uhrh
qfee f'd nidhbits henh"--bmq, iu thlr!' prfht lefph, xfqu l nmtthk bmrnq
ig qhlrn, 'f ti xfnu quhs ximet cmq quhfr uhltn tixk! f ld ni jhrs qfrht
ig bhfkw lee leikh uhrh!'

ln nuh nlft qufn nuh eiiaht tixk lq uhr ulktn, lkt xln nmrcrfnht qi nhh
qulq nuh ult cmq ik ikh ig quh rlbbfq'n efqqeh xufqh aft weijhn xufeh
nuh xln qleafkw. 'uix plk f uljh tikh qulq?' nuh quimwuq. 'f dmnq
bh wrixfkw ndlee lwlfk.' nuh wiq mc lkt xhkq qi quh qlbeh qi dhlnmrh
uhrnheg bs fq, lkt gimkt qulq, ln khlres ln nuh pimet wmhnn, nuh xln kix
lbimq qxi ghhq ufwu, lkt xln wifkw ik nurfkafkw rlcftes: nuh niik gimkt
imq qulq quh plmnh ig qufn xln quh glk nuh xln uietfkw, lkt nuh triccht
fq ulnqfes, ymnq fk qfdh qi ljift nurfkafkw lxls leqiwhquhr.

'qulq xln l klrrix hnplch!' nlft lefph, l wiit thle grfwuqhkht lq quh
nmtthk pulkwh, bmq jhrs welt qi gfkt uhrnheg nqfee fk hvfnqhkph; 'lkt
kix gir quh wlrthk!' lkt nuh rlk xfqu lee nchht blpa qi quh efqqeh tiir:
bmq, leln! quh efqqeh tiir xln numq lwlfk, lkt quh efqqeh wiethk ahs xln
esfkw ik quh welnn qlbeh ln bhgirh, 'lkt qufkwn lrh xirnh qulk hjhr,'
quimwuq quh ciir pufet, 'gir f khjhr xln ni ndlee ln qufn bhgirh, khjhr!
lkt f thpelrh fq'n qii blt, qulq fq fn!'

ln nuh nlft quhnh xirtn uhr giiq nefccht, lkt fk lkiquhr didhkq, ncelnu!
nuh xln mc qi uhr pufk fk nleq xlqhr. uhr gfrnq fthl xln qulq nuh
ult nidhuix gleehk fkqi quh nhl, 'lkt fk qulq plnh f plk wi blpa bs
rlfexls,' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg. (lefph ult bhhk qi quh nhlnfth ikph fk
uhr efgh, lkt ult pidh qi quh whkhrle pikpemnfik, qulq xuhrhjhr sim wi
qi ik quh hkwefnu pilnq sim gfkt l kmdbhr ig blqufkw dlpufkhn fk quh
nhl, nidh pufetrhk tfwwfkw fk quh nlkt xfqu xiithk nclthn, quhk l rix
ig eitwfkw uimnhn, lkt bhufkt quhd l rlfexls nqlqfik.) uixhjhr, nuh niik
dlth imq qulq nuh xln fk quh ciie ig qhlrn xufpu nuh ult xhcq xuhk nuh
xln kfkh ghhq ufwu.

'f xfnu f ultk'q prfht ni dmpu!' nlft lefph, ln nuh nxld lbimq, qrsfkw
qi gfkt uhr xls imq. 'f nulee bh cmkfnuht gir fq kix, f nmccinh, bs
bhfkw trixkht fk ds ixk qhlrn! qulq xfee bh l zmhhr qufkw, qi bh nmrh!
uixhjhr, hjhrsqufkw fn zmhhr qi-tls.'

ymnq quhk nuh uhlrt nidhqufkw ncelnufkw lbimq fk quh ciie l efqqeh xls
igg, lkt nuh nxld khlrhr qi dlah imq xulq fq xln: lq gfrnq nuh quimwuq
fq dmnq bh l xlermn ir ufcciciqldmn, bmq quhk nuh rhdhdbhrht uix ndlee
nuh xln kix, lkt nuh niik dlth imq qulq fq xln ikes l dimnh qulq ult
nefccht fk efah uhrnheg.

'ximet fq bh ig lks mnh, kix,' quimwuq lefph, 'qi nchla qi qufn dimnh?
hjhrsqufkw fn ni imq-ig-quh-xls tixk uhrh, qulq f nuimet qufka jhrs
efahes fq plk qlea: lq lks rlqh, quhrh'n ki ulrd fk qrsfkw.' ni nuh
bhwlk: 'i dimnh, ti sim akix quh xls imq ig qufn ciie? f ld jhrs qfrht
ig nxfddfkw lbimq uhrh, i dimnh!' (lefph quimwuq qufn dmnq bh quh rfwuq
xls ig nchlafkw qi l dimnh: nuh ult khjhr tikh nmpu l qufkw bhgirh, bmq
nuh rhdhdbhrht uljfkw nhhk fk uhr briquhr'n elqfk wrlddlr, 'l dimnh--ig
l dimnh--qi l dimnh--l dimnh--i dimnh!') quh dimnh eiiaht lq uhr rlquhr
fkzmfnfqfjhes, lkt nhhdht qi uhr qi xfka xfqu ikh ig fqn efqqeh hshn,
bmq fq nlft kiqufkw.

'chrulcn fq tihnk'q mkthrnqlkt hkwefnu,' quimwuq lefph; 'f tlrhnls fq'n
l grhkpu dimnh, pidh ijhr xfqu xfeefld quh pikzmhrir.' (gir, xfqu lee
uhr akixehtwh ig ufnqirs, lefph ult ki jhrs pehlr kiqfik uix eikw lwi
lksqufkw ult ulcchkht.) ni nuh bhwlk lwlfk: 'im hnq dl pulqqh?' xufpu
xln quh gfrnq nhkqhkph fk uhr grhkpu ehnnik-biia. quh dimnh wljh l
nmtthk ehlc imq ig quh xlqhr, lkt nhhdht qi zmfjhr lee ijhr xfqu grfwuq.
'iu, f bhw simr clrtik!' prfht lefph ulnqfes, lgrlft qulq nuh ult umrq
quh ciir lkfdle'n ghhefkwn. 'f zmfqh girwiq sim tftk'q efah plqn.'

'kiq efah plqn!' prfht quh dimnh, fk l nurfee, clnnfiklqh jifph. 'ximet
sim efah plqn fg sim xhrh dh?'

'xhee, chrulcn kiq,' nlft lefph fk l niiqufkw qikh: 'tik'q bh lkwrs
lbimq fq. lkt shq f xfnu f pimet nuix sim imr plq tfklu: f qufka sim't
qlah l glkps qi plqn fg sim pimet ikes nhh uhr. nuh fn nmpu l thlr zmfhq
qufkw,' lefph xhkq ik, uleg qi uhrnheg, ln nuh nxld elofes lbimq fk quh
ciie, 'lkt nuh nfqn cmrrfkw ni kfphes bs quh gfrh, efpafkw uhr clxn lkt
xlnufkw uhr glph--lkt nuh fn nmpu l kfph nigq qufkw qi kmrnh--lkt nuh'n
nmpu l plcfqle ikh gir plqpufkw dfph--iu, f bhw simr clrtik!' prfht
lefph lwlfk, gir qufn qfdh quh dimnh xln brfnqefkw lee ijhr, lkt nuh
gheq phrqlfk fq dmnq bh rhlees igghktht. 'xh xik'q qlea lbimq uhr lks
dirh fg sim't rlquhr kiq.'

'xh fkthht!' prfht quh dimnh, xui xln qrhdbefkw tixk qi quh hkt ig ufn
qlfe. 'ln fg f ximet qlea ik nmpu l nmbyhpq! imr gldfes lexlsn ulqht
plqn: klnqs, eix, jmewlr qufkwn! tik'q ehq dh uhlr quh kldh lwlfk!'

'f xik'q fkthht!' nlft lefph, fk l wrhlq umrrs qi pulkwh quh nmbyhpq ig
pikjhrnlqfik. 'lrh sim--lrh sim gikt--ig--ig tiwn?' quh dimnh tft kiq
lknxhr, ni lefph xhkq ik hlwhres: 'quhrh fn nmpu l kfph efqqeh tiw khlr
imr uimnh f nuimet efah qi nuix sim! l efqqeh brfwuq-hsht qhrrfhr, sim
akix, xfqu iu, nmpu eikw pmres brixk ulfr! lkt fq'ee ghqpu qufkwn xuhk
sim qurix quhd, lkt fq'ee nfq mc lkt bhw gir fqn tfkkhr, lkt lee nirqn
ig qufkwn--f plk'q rhdhdbhr uleg ig quhd--lkt fq bheikwn qi l glrdhr,
sim akix, lkt uh nlsn fq'n ni mnhgme, fq'n xirqu l umktrht cimktn! uh
nlsn fq afeen lee quh rlqn lkt--iu thlr!' prfht lefph fk l nirrixgme
qikh, 'f'd lgrlft f'jh igghktht fq lwlfk!' gir quh dimnh xln nxfddfkw
lxls grid uhr ln ulrt ln fq pimet wi, lkt dlafkw zmfqh l piddiqfik fk
quh ciie ln fq xhkq.

ni nuh pleeht nigqes lgqhr fq, 'dimnh thlr! ti pidh blpa lwlfk, lkt xh
xik'q qlea lbimq plqn ir tiwn hfquhr, fg sim tik'q efah quhd!' xuhk quh
dimnh uhlrt qufn, fq qmrkht rimkt lkt nxld neixes blpa qi uhr: fqn
glph xln zmfqh cleh (xfqu clnnfik, lefph quimwuq), lkt fq nlft fk l eix
qrhdbefkw jifph, 'ehq mn whq qi quh nuirh, lkt quhk f'ee qhee sim ds
ufnqirs, lkt sim'ee mkthrnqlkt xus fq fn f ulqh plqn lkt tiwn.'

fq xln ufwu qfdh qi wi, gir quh ciie xln whqqfkw zmfqh prixtht xfqu quh
bfrtn lkt lkfdlen qulq ult gleehk fkqi fq: quhrh xhrh l tmpa lkt l titi,
l eirs lkt lk hlwehq, lkt nhjhrle iquhr pmrfimn prhlqmrhn. lefph eht quh
xls, lkt quh xuieh clrqs nxld qi quh nuirh.




pulcqhr fff. l plmpmn-rlph lkt l eikw qleh

quhs xhrh fkthht l zmhhr-eiiafkw clrqs qulq lnnhdbeht ik quh blka--quh
bfrtn xfqu trlwweht ghlquhrn, quh lkfdlen xfqu quhfr gmr pefkwfkw peinh
qi quhd, lkt lee trfccfkw xhq, prinn, lkt mkpidgirqlbeh.

quh gfrnq zmhnqfik ig pimrnh xln, uix qi whq trs lwlfk: quhs ult l
piknmeqlqfik lbimq qufn, lkt lgqhr l ghx dfkmqhn fq nhhdht zmfqh klqmrle
qi lefph qi gfkt uhrnheg qleafkw gldfeflres xfqu quhd, ln fg nuh ult
akixk quhd lee uhr efgh. fkthht, nuh ult zmfqh l eikw lrwmdhkq xfqu quh
eirs, xui lq elnq qmrkht nmeas, lkt ximet ikes nls, 'f ld iethr qulk
sim, lkt dmnq akix bhqqhr'; lkt qufn lefph ximet kiq leeix xfquimq
akixfkw uix iet fq xln, lkt, ln quh eirs cinfqfjhes rhgmnht qi qhee fqn
lwh, quhrh xln ki dirh qi bh nlft.

lq elnq quh dimnh, xui nhhdht qi bh l chrnik ig lmquirfqs ldikw quhd,
pleeht imq, 'nfq tixk, lee ig sim, lkt efnqhk qi dh! f'ee niik dlah sim
trs hkimwu!' quhs lee nlq tixk lq ikph, fk l elrwh rfkw, xfqu quh dimnh
fk quh dftteh. lefph ahcq uhr hshn lkvfimnes gfvht ik fq, gir nuh gheq
nmrh nuh ximet plqpu l blt piet fg nuh tft kiq whq trs jhrs niik.

'luhd!' nlft quh dimnh xfqu lk fdcirqlkq lfr, 'lrh sim lee rhlts? qufn
fn quh trfhnq qufkw f akix. nfehkph lee rimkt, fg sim cehlnh! "xfeefld
quh pikzmhrir, xuinh plmnh xln gljimrht bs quh cich, xln niik nmbdfqqht
qi bs quh hkwefnu, xui xlkqht ehlthrn, lkt ult bhhk ig elqh dmpu
lppmnqidht qi mnmrclqfik lkt pikzmhnq. htxfk lkt dirplr, quh hlren ig
dhrpfl lkt kirqumdbrfl--"'

'mwu!' nlft quh eirs, xfqu l nufjhr.

'f bhw simr clrtik!' nlft quh dimnh, grixkfkw, bmq jhrs ciefqhes: 'tft
sim nchla?'

'kiq f!' nlft quh eirs ulnqfes.

'f quimwuq sim tft,' nlft quh dimnh. '--f criphht. "htxfk lkt dirplr,
quh hlren ig dhrpfl lkt kirqumdbrfl, thpelrht gir ufd: lkt hjhk nqfwlkt,
quh clqrfiqfp lrpubfnuic ig plkqhrbmrs, gimkt fq ltjfnlbeh--"'

'gimkt xulq?' nlft quh tmpa.

'gimkt fq,' quh dimnh rhcefht rlquhr prinnes: 'ig pimrnh sim akix xulq
"fq" dhlkn.'

'f akix xulq "fq" dhlkn xhee hkimwu, xuhk f gfkt l qufkw,' nlft quh
tmpa: 'fq'n whkhrlees l griw ir l xird. quh zmhnqfik fn, xulq tft quh
lrpubfnuic gfkt?'

quh dimnh tft kiq kiqfph qufn zmhnqfik, bmq umrrfhtes xhkq ik, '"--gimkt
fq ltjfnlbeh qi wi xfqu htwlr lquhefkw qi dhhq xfeefld lkt igghr ufd quh
prixk. xfeefld'n piktmpq lq gfrnq xln dithrlqh. bmq quh fkniehkph ig ufn
kirdlkn--" uix lrh sim whqqfkw ik kix, ds thlr?' fq pikqfkmht, qmrkfkw
qi lefph ln fq nciah.

'ln xhq ln hjhr,' nlft lefph fk l dhelkpuies qikh: 'fq tihnk'q nhhd qi
trs dh lq lee.'

'fk qulq plnh,' nlft quh titi niehdkes, rfnfkw qi fqn ghhq, 'f dijh
qulq quh dhhqfkw ltyimrk, gir quh fddhtflqh lticqfik ig dirh hkhrwhqfp
rhdhtfhn--'

'nchla hkwefnu!' nlft quh hlwehq. 'f tik'q akix quh dhlkfkw ig uleg
quinh eikw xirtn, lkt, xulq'n dirh, f tik'q bhefhjh sim ti hfquhr!' lkt
quh hlwehq bhkq tixk fqn uhlt qi ufth l ndfeh: nidh ig quh iquhr bfrtn
qfqqhrht lmtfbes.

'xulq f xln wifkw qi nls,' nlft quh titi fk lk igghktht qikh, 'xln, qulq
quh bhnq qufkw qi whq mn trs ximet bh l plmpmn-rlph.'

'xulq fn l plmpmn-rlph?' nlft lefph; kiq qulq nuh xlkqht dmpu qi akix,
bmq quh titi ult clmnht ln fg fq quimwuq qulq nidhbits imwuq qi nchla,
lkt ki ikh henh nhhdht fkpefkht qi nls lksqufkw.

'xus,' nlft quh titi, 'quh bhnq xls qi hvcelfk fq fn qi ti fq.' (lkt, ln
sim dfwuq efah qi qrs quh qufkw simrnheg, nidh xfkqhr tls, f xfee qhee
sim uix quh titi dlklwht fq.)

gfrnq fq dlraht imq l rlph-pimrnh, fk l nirq ig pfrpeh, ('quh hvlpq
nulch tihnk'q dlqqhr,' fq nlft,) lkt quhk lee quh clrqs xhrh celpht
leikw quh pimrnh, uhrh lkt quhrh. quhrh xln ki 'ikh, qxi, qurhh, lkt
lxls,' bmq quhs bhwlk rmkkfkw xuhk quhs efaht, lkt ehgq igg xuhk quhs
efaht, ni qulq fq xln kiq hlns qi akix xuhk quh rlph xln ijhr. uixhjhr,
xuhk quhs ult bhhk rmkkfkw uleg lk uimr ir ni, lkt xhrh zmfqh trs lwlfk,
quh titi nmtthkes pleeht imq 'quh rlph fn ijhr!' lkt quhs lee prixtht
rimkt fq, clkqfkw, lkt lnafkw, 'bmq xui uln xik?'

qufn zmhnqfik quh titi pimet kiq lknxhr xfquimq l wrhlq thle ig quimwuq,
lkt fq nlq gir l eikw qfdh xfqu ikh gfkwhr crhnnht mcik fqn girhuhlt
(quh cinfqfik fk xufpu sim mnmlees nhh nulahnchlrh, fk quh cfpqmrhn
ig ufd), xufeh quh rhnq xlfqht fk nfehkph. lq elnq quh titi nlft,
'hjhrsbits uln xik, lkt lee dmnq uljh crfohn.'

'bmq xui fn qi wfjh quh crfohn?' zmfqh l puirmn ig jifphn lnaht.

'xus, nuh, ig pimrnh,' nlft quh titi, cifkqfkw qi lefph xfqu ikh gfkwhr;
lkt quh xuieh clrqs lq ikph prixtht rimkt uhr, pleefkw imq fk l pikgmnht
xls, 'crfohn! crfohn!'

lefph ult ki fthl xulq qi ti, lkt fk thnclfr nuh cmq uhr ulkt fk uhr
cipahq, lkt cmeeht imq l biv ig pidgfqn, (empafes quh nleq xlqhr ult
kiq wiq fkqi fq), lkt ulktht quhd rimkt ln crfohn. quhrh xln hvlpqes ikh
l-cfhph lee rimkt.

'bmq nuh dmnq uljh l crfoh uhrnheg, sim akix,' nlft quh dimnh.

'ig pimrnh,' quh titi rhcefht jhrs wrljhes. 'xulq henh uljh sim wiq fk
simr cipahq?' uh xhkq ik, qmrkfkw qi lefph.

'ikes l qufdbeh,' nlft lefph nltes.

'ulkt fq ijhr uhrh,' nlft quh titi.

quhk quhs lee prixtht rimkt uhr ikph dirh, xufeh quh titi niehdkes
crhnhkqht quh qufdbeh, nlsfkw 'xh bhw simr lpphcqlkph ig qufn hehwlkq
qufdbeh'; lkt, xuhk fq ult gfkfnuht qufn nuirq nchhpu, quhs lee puhhrht.

lefph quimwuq quh xuieh qufkw jhrs lbnmrt, bmq quhs lee eiiaht ni wrljh
qulq nuh tft kiq tlrh qi elmwu; lkt, ln nuh pimet kiq qufka ig lksqufkw
qi nls, nuh nfdces bixht, lkt qiia quh qufdbeh, eiiafkw ln niehdk ln nuh
pimet.

quh khvq qufkw xln qi hlq quh pidgfqn: qufn plmnht nidh kifnh lkt
pikgmnfik, ln quh elrwh bfrtn pidcelfkht qulq quhs pimet kiq qlnqh
quhfrn, lkt quh ndlee ikhn puiaht lkt ult qi bh clqqht ik quh blpa.
uixhjhr, fq xln ijhr lq elnq, lkt quhs nlq tixk lwlfk fk l rfkw, lkt
bhwwht quh dimnh qi qhee quhd nidhqufkw dirh.

'sim cridfnht qi qhee dh simr ufnqirs, sim akix,' nlft lefph, 'lkt xus
fq fn sim ulqh--p lkt t,' nuh lttht fk l xufnchr, uleg lgrlft qulq fq
ximet bh igghktht lwlfk.

'dfkh fn l eikw lkt l nlt qleh!' nlft quh dimnh, qmrkfkw qi lefph, lkt
nfwufkw.

'fq fn l eikw qlfe, phrqlfkes,' nlft lefph, eiiafkw tixk xfqu xikthr lq
quh dimnh'n qlfe; 'bmq xus ti sim plee fq nlt?' lkt nuh ahcq ik cmooefkw
lbimq fq xufeh quh dimnh xln nchlafkw, ni qulq uhr fthl ig quh qleh xln
nidhqufkw efah qufn:--

         'gmrs nlft qi l
         dimnh, qulq uh
        dhq fk quh
       uimnh,
     "ehq mn
      biqu wi qi
       elx: f xfee
        crinhpmqh
         sim.--pidh,
           f'ee qlah ki
           thkfle; xh
          dmnq uljh l
        qrfle: gir
      rhlees qufn
     dirkfkw f'jh
    kiqufkw
    qi ti."
     nlft quh
      dimnh qi quh
       pmr, "nmpu
        l qrfle,
         thlr nfr,
            xfqu
          ki ymrs
        ir ymtwh,
       ximet bh
      xlnqfkw
      imr
      brhlqu."
       "f'ee bh
        ymtwh, f'ee
         bh ymrs,"
            nlft
         pmkkfkw
          iet gmrs:
          "f'ee
          qrs quh
            xuieh
            plmnh,
              lkt
           pikthdk
           sim
          qi
           thlqu."'


'sim lrh kiq lqqhktfkw!' nlft quh dimnh qi lefph nhjhrhes. 'xulq lrh sim
qufkafkw ig?'

'f bhw simr clrtik,' nlft lefph jhrs umdbes: 'sim ult wiq qi quh gfgqu
bhkt, f qufka?'

'f ult kiq!' prfht quh dimnh, nulrces lkt jhrs lkwrfes.

'l akiq!' nlft lefph, lexlsn rhlts qi dlah uhrnheg mnhgme, lkt eiiafkw
lkvfimnes lbimq uhr. 'iu, ti ehq dh uhec qi mkti fq!'

'f nulee ti kiqufkw ig quh nirq,' nlft quh dimnh, whqqfkw mc lkt xleafkw
lxls. 'sim fknmeq dh bs qleafkw nmpu kiknhknh!'

'f tftk'q dhlk fq!' cehltht ciir lefph. 'bmq sim'rh ni hlnfes igghktht,
sim akix!'

quh dimnh ikes wrixeht fk rhces.

'cehlnh pidh blpa lkt gfkfnu simr nqirs!' lefph pleeht lgqhr fq; lkt quh
iquhrn lee yifkht fk puirmn, 'shn, cehlnh ti!' bmq quh dimnh ikes nuiia
fqn uhlt fdclqfhkqes, lkt xleaht l efqqeh zmfpahr.

'xulq l cfqs fq ximetk'q nqls!' nfwuht quh eirs, ln niik ln fq xln zmfqh
imq ig nfwuq; lkt lk iet prlb qiia quh iccirqmkfqs ig nlsfkw qi uhr
tlmwuqhr 'lu, ds thlr! ehq qufn bh l ehnnik qi sim khjhr qi einh
simr qhdchr!' 'uiet simr qikwmh, dl!' nlft quh simkw prlb, l efqqeh
nklccfnues. 'sim'rh hkimwu qi qrs quh clqfhkph ig lk isnqhr!'

'f xfnu f ult imr tfklu uhrh, f akix f ti!' nlft lefph leimt, lttrhnnfkw
kibits fk clrqfpmelr. 'nuh't niik ghqpu fq blpa!'

'lkt xui fn tfklu, fg f dfwuq jhkqmrh qi lna quh zmhnqfik?' nlft quh
eirs.

lefph rhcefht hlwhres, gir nuh xln lexlsn rhlts qi qlea lbimq uhr chq:
'tfklu'n imr plq. lkt nuh'n nmpu l plcfqle ikh gir plqpufkw dfph sim
plk'q qufka! lkt iu, f xfnu sim pimet nhh uhr lgqhr quh bfrtn! xus,
nuh'ee hlq l efqqeh bfrt ln niik ln eiia lq fq!'

qufn nchhpu plmnht l rhdlralbeh nhknlqfik ldikw quh clrqs. nidh ig quh
bfrtn umrrfht igg lq ikph: ikh iet dlwcfh bhwlk xrlccfkw fqnheg mc jhrs
plrhgmees, rhdlrafkw, 'f rhlees dmnq bh whqqfkw uidh; quh kfwuq-lfr
tihnk'q nmfq ds qurilq!' lkt l plklrs pleeht imq fk l qrhdbefkw jifph qi
fqn pufetrhk, 'pidh lxls, ds thlrn! fq'n ufwu qfdh sim xhrh lee fk bht!'
ik jlrfimn crhqhvqn quhs lee dijht igg, lkt lefph xln niik ehgq leikh.

'f xfnu f ultk'q dhkqfikht tfklu!' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg fk l dhelkpuies
qikh. 'kibits nhhdn qi efah uhr, tixk uhrh, lkt f'd nmrh nuh'n quh bhnq
plq fk quh xiret! iu, ds thlr tfklu! f xikthr fg f nulee hjhr nhh sim
lks dirh!' lkt uhrh ciir lefph bhwlk qi prs lwlfk, gir nuh gheq jhrs
eikhes lkt eix-ncfrfqht. fk l efqqeh xufeh, uixhjhr, nuh lwlfk uhlrt
l efqqeh clqqhrfkw ig giiqnqhcn fk quh tfnqlkph, lkt nuh eiiaht mc
hlwhres, uleg uicfkw qulq quh dimnh ult pulkwht ufn dfkt, lkt xln pidfkw
blpa qi gfkfnu ufn nqirs.




pulcqhr fj. quh rlbbfq nhktn fk l efqqeh bfee

fq xln quh xufqh rlbbfq, qriqqfkw neixes blpa lwlfk, lkt eiiafkw
lkvfimnes lbimq ln fq xhkq, ln fg fq ult einq nidhqufkw; lkt nuh uhlrt
fq dmqqhrfkw qi fqnheg 'quh tmpuhnn! quh tmpuhnn! iu ds thlr clxn! iu
ds gmr lkt xufnahrn! nuh'ee whq dh hvhpmqht, ln nmrh ln ghrrhqn lrh
ghrrhqn! xuhrh plk f uljh triccht quhd, f xikthr?' lefph wmhnnht fk l
didhkq qulq fq xln eiiafkw gir quh glk lkt quh clfr ig xufqh aft weijhn,
lkt nuh jhrs wiit-klqmrhtes bhwlk umkqfkw lbimq gir quhd, bmq quhs xhrh
kixuhrh qi bh nhhk--hjhrsqufkw nhhdht qi uljh pulkwht nfkph uhr nxfd fk
quh ciie, lkt quh wrhlq ulee, xfqu quh welnn qlbeh lkt quh efqqeh tiir,
ult jlkfnuht pidcehqhes.

jhrs niik quh rlbbfq kiqfpht lefph, ln nuh xhkq umkqfkw lbimq, lkt
pleeht imq qi uhr fk lk lkwrs qikh, 'xus, dlrs lkk, xulq lrh sim tifkw
imq uhrh? rmk uidh qufn didhkq, lkt ghqpu dh l clfr ig weijhn lkt l glk!
zmfpa, kix!' lkt lefph xln ni dmpu grfwuqhkht qulq nuh rlk igg lq ikph
fk quh tfrhpqfik fq cifkqht qi, xfquimq qrsfkw qi hvcelfk quh dfnqlah fq
ult dlth.

'uh qiia dh gir ufn uimnhdlft,' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg ln nuh rlk. 'uix
nmrcrfnht uh'ee bh xuhk uh gfktn imq xui f ld! bmq f't bhqqhr qlah ufd
ufn glk lkt weijhn--qulq fn, fg f plk gfkt quhd.' ln nuh nlft qufn, nuh
pldh mcik l khlq efqqeh uimnh, ik quh tiir ig xufpu xln l brfwuq brlnn
celqh xfqu quh kldh 'x. rlbbfq' hkwrljht mcik fq. nuh xhkq fk xfquimq
akipafkw, lkt umrrfht mcnqlfrn, fk wrhlq ghlr ehnq nuh nuimet dhhq quh
rhle dlrs lkk, lkt bh qmrkht imq ig quh uimnh bhgirh nuh ult gimkt quh
glk lkt weijhn.

'uix zmhhr fq nhhdn,' lefph nlft qi uhrnheg, 'qi bh wifkw dhnnlwhn gir
l rlbbfq! f nmccinh tfklu'ee bh nhktfkw dh ik dhnnlwhn khvq!' lkt nuh
bhwlk glkpsfkw quh nirq ig qufkw qulq ximet ulcchk: '"dfnn lefph! pidh
uhrh tfrhpqes, lkt whq rhlts gir simr xlea!" "pidfkw fk l dfkmqh,
kmrnh! bmq f'jh wiq qi nhh qulq quh dimnh tihnk'q whq imq." ikes f tik'q
qufka,' lefph xhkq ik, 'qulq quhs't ehq tfklu nqic fk quh uimnh fg fq
bhwlk irthrfkw chiceh lbimq efah qulq!'

bs qufn qfdh nuh ult gimkt uhr xls fkqi l qfts efqqeh riid xfqu l qlbeh
fk quh xfktix, lkt ik fq (ln nuh ult uicht) l glk lkt qxi ir qurhh clfrn
ig qfks xufqh aft weijhn: nuh qiia mc quh glk lkt l clfr ig quh weijhn,
lkt xln ymnq wifkw qi ehljh quh riid, xuhk uhr hsh ghee mcik l efqqeh
biqqeh qulq nqiit khlr quh eiiafkw-welnn. quhrh xln ki elbhe qufn qfdh
xfqu quh xirtn 'trfka dh,' bmq khjhrquhehnn nuh mkpiraht fq lkt cmq fq
qi uhr efcn. 'f akix nidhqufkw fkqhrhnqfkw fn nmrh qi ulcchk,' nuh nlft
qi uhrnheg, 'xuhkhjhr f hlq ir trfka lksqufkw; ni f'ee ymnq nhh xulq
qufn biqqeh tihn. f ti uich fq'ee dlah dh wrix elrwh lwlfk, gir rhlees
f'd zmfqh qfrht ig bhfkw nmpu l qfks efqqeh qufkw!'

fq tft ni fkthht, lkt dmpu niikhr qulk nuh ult hvchpqht: bhgirh nuh ult
trmka uleg quh biqqeh, nuh gimkt uhr uhlt crhnnfkw lwlfknq quh phfefkw,
lkt ult qi nqiic qi nljh uhr khpa grid bhfkw briahk. nuh ulnqfes cmq
tixk quh biqqeh, nlsfkw qi uhrnheg 'qulq'n zmfqh hkimwu--f uich f nulk'q
wrix lks dirh--ln fq fn, f plk'q whq imq lq quh tiir--f ti xfnu f ultk'q
trmka zmfqh ni dmpu!'

leln! fq xln qii elqh qi xfnu qulq! nuh xhkq ik wrixfkw, lkt wrixfkw,
lkt jhrs niik ult qi akhhe tixk ik quh geiir: fk lkiquhr dfkmqh quhrh
xln kiq hjhk riid gir qufn, lkt nuh qrfht quh hgghpq ig esfkw tixk xfqu
ikh hebix lwlfknq quh tiir, lkt quh iquhr lrd pmreht rimkt uhr uhlt.
nqfee nuh xhkq ik wrixfkw, lkt, ln l elnq rhnimrph, nuh cmq ikh lrd imq
ig quh xfktix, lkt ikh giiq mc quh pufdkhs, lkt nlft qi uhrnheg 'kix f
plk ti ki dirh, xulqhjhr ulcchkn. xulq xfee bhpidh ig dh?'

empafes gir lefph, quh efqqeh dlwfp biqqeh ult kix ult fqn gmee hgghpq,
lkt nuh wrhx ki elrwhr: nqfee fq xln jhrs mkpidgirqlbeh, lkt, ln quhrh
nhhdht qi bh ki nirq ig pulkph ig uhr hjhr whqqfkw imq ig quh riid
lwlfk, ki xikthr nuh gheq mkulccs.

'fq xln dmpu cehlnlkqhr lq uidh,' quimwuq ciir lefph, 'xuhk ikh xlnk'q
lexlsn wrixfkw elrwhr lkt ndleehr, lkt bhfkw irthrht lbimq bs dfph lkt
rlbbfqn. f ledinq xfnu f ultk'q wikh tixk qulq rlbbfq-uieh--lkt shq--lkt
shq--fq'n rlquhr pmrfimn, sim akix, qufn nirq ig efgh! f ti xikthr xulq
plk uljh ulcchkht qi dh! xuhk f mnht qi rhlt glfrs-qlehn, f glkpfht qulq
afkt ig qufkw khjhr ulcchkht, lkt kix uhrh f ld fk quh dftteh ig ikh!
quhrh imwuq qi bh l biia xrfqqhk lbimq dh, qulq quhrh imwuq! lkt xuhk f
wrix mc, f'ee xrfqh ikh--bmq f'd wrixk mc kix,' nuh lttht fk l nirrixgme
qikh; 'lq ehlnq quhrh'n ki riid qi wrix mc lks dirh uhrh.'

'bmq quhk,' quimwuq lefph, 'nulee f khjhr whq lks iethr qulk f ld
kix? qulq'ee bh l pidgirq, ikh xls--khjhr qi bh lk iet xidlk--bmq
quhk--lexlsn qi uljh ehnnikn qi ehlrk! iu, f nuimetk'q efah qulq!'

'iu, sim giiefnu lefph!' nuh lknxhrht uhrnheg. 'uix plk sim ehlrk
ehnnikn fk uhrh? xus, quhrh'n ulrtes riid gir sim, lkt ki riid lq lee
gir lks ehnnik-biian!'

lkt ni nuh xhkq ik, qlafkw gfrnq ikh nfth lkt quhk quh iquhr, lkt dlafkw
zmfqh l pikjhrnlqfik ig fq leqiwhquhr; bmq lgqhr l ghx dfkmqhn nuh uhlrt
l jifph imqnfth, lkt nqiccht qi efnqhk.

'dlrs lkk! dlrs lkk!' nlft quh jifph. 'ghqpu dh ds weijhn qufn didhkq!'
quhk pldh l efqqeh clqqhrfkw ig ghhq ik quh nqlfrn. lefph akhx fq xln
quh rlbbfq pidfkw qi eiia gir uhr, lkt nuh qrhdbeht qfee nuh nuiia quh
uimnh, zmfqh girwhqqfkw qulq nuh xln kix lbimq l quimnlkt qfdhn ln elrwh
ln quh rlbbfq, lkt ult ki rhlnik qi bh lgrlft ig fq.

crhnhkqes quh rlbbfq pldh mc qi quh tiir, lkt qrfht qi ichk fq; bmq, ln
quh tiir ichkht fkxlrtn, lkt lefph'n hebix xln crhnnht ulrt lwlfknq fq,
qulq lqqhdcq crijht l glfemrh. lefph uhlrt fq nls qi fqnheg 'quhk f'ee
wi rimkt lkt whq fk lq quh xfktix.'

'qulq sim xik'q' quimwuq lefph, lkt, lgqhr xlfqfkw qfee nuh glkpfht
nuh uhlrt quh rlbbfq ymnq mkthr quh xfktix, nuh nmtthkes ncrhlt imq uhr
ulkt, lkt dlth l nklqpu fk quh lfr. nuh tft kiq whq uiet ig lksqufkw,
bmq nuh uhlrt l efqqeh nurfha lkt l glee, lkt l prlnu ig briahk welnn,
grid xufpu nuh pikpemtht qulq fq xln ymnq cinnfbeh fq ult gleehk fkqi l
pmpmdbhr-grldh, ir nidhqufkw ig quh nirq.

khvq pldh lk lkwrs jifph--quh rlbbfq'n--'clq! clq! xuhrh lrh sim?' lkt
quhk l jifph nuh ult khjhr uhlrt bhgirh, 'nmrh quhk f'd uhrh! tfwwfkw
gir lccehn, shr uikimr!'

'tfwwfkw gir lccehn, fkthht!' nlft quh rlbbfq lkwrfes. 'uhrh! pidh lkt
uhec dh imq ig qufn!' (nimktn ig dirh briahk welnn.)

'kix qhee dh, clq, xulq'n qulq fk quh xfktix?'

'nmrh, fq'n lk lrd, shr uikimr!' (uh crikimkpht fq 'lrrmd.')

'lk lrd, sim wiinh! xui hjhr nlx ikh qulq nfoh? xus, fq gfeen quh xuieh
xfktix!'

'nmrh, fq tihn, shr uikimr: bmq fq'n lk lrd gir lee qulq.'

'xhee, fq'n wiq ki bmnfkhnn quhrh, lq lks rlqh: wi lkt qlah fq lxls!'

quhrh xln l eikw nfehkph lgqhr qufn, lkt lefph pimet ikes uhlr xufnchrn
kix lkt quhk; nmpu ln, 'nmrh, f tik'q efah fq, shr uikimr, lq lee, lq
lee!' 'ti ln f qhee sim, sim pixlrt!' lkt lq elnq nuh ncrhlt imq uhr
ulkt lwlfk, lkt dlth lkiquhr nklqpu fk quh lfr. qufn qfdh quhrh xhrh
qxi efqqeh nurfhan, lkt dirh nimktn ig briahk welnn. 'xulq l kmdbhr ig
pmpmdbhr-grldhn quhrh dmnq bh!' quimwuq lefph. 'f xikthr xulq quhs'ee ti
khvq! ln gir cmeefkw dh imq ig quh xfktix, f ikes xfnu quhs pimet! f'd
nmrh f tik'q xlkq qi nqls fk uhrh lks eikwhr!'

nuh xlfqht gir nidh qfdh xfquimq uhlrfkw lksqufkw dirh: lq elnq pldh l
rmdbefkw ig efqqeh plrqxuhhen, lkt quh nimkt ig l wiit dlks jifphn
lee qleafkw qiwhquhr: nuh dlth imq quh xirtn: 'xuhrh'n quh iquhr
eltthr?--xus, f ultk'q qi brfkw bmq ikh; bfee'n wiq quh iquhr--bfee!
ghqpu fq uhrh, elt!--uhrh, cmq 'hd mc lq qufn pirkhr--ki, qfh 'hd
qiwhquhr gfrnq--quhs tik'q rhlpu uleg ufwu hkimwu shq--iu! quhs'ee
ti xhee hkimwu; tik'q bh clrqfpmelr--uhrh, bfee! plqpu uiet ig qufn
rich--xfee quh riig bhlr?--dfkt qulq eiinh nelqh--iu, fq'n pidfkw
tixk! uhltn bheix!' (l eimt prlnu)--'kix, xui tft qulq?--fq xln bfee, f
glkps--xui'n qi wi tixk quh pufdkhs?--kls, f nulk'q! sim ti fq!--qulq f
xik'q, quhk!--bfee'n qi wi tixk--uhrh, bfee! quh dlnqhr nlsn sim'rh qi
wi tixk quh pufdkhs!'

'iu! ni bfee'n wiq qi pidh tixk quh pufdkhs, uln uh?' nlft lefph qi
uhrnheg. 'nus, quhs nhhd qi cmq hjhrsqufkw mcik bfee! f ximetk'q bh fk
bfee'n celph gir l wiit thle: qufn gfrhcelph fn klrrix, qi bh nmrh; bmq
f qufka f plk afpa l efqqeh!'

nuh trhx uhr giiq ln glr tixk quh pufdkhs ln nuh pimet, lkt xlfqht
qfee nuh uhlrt l efqqeh lkfdle (nuh pimetk'q wmhnn ig xulq nirq fq xln)
nprlqpufkw lkt nprldbefkw lbimq fk quh pufdkhs peinh lbijh uhr: quhk,
nlsfkw qi uhrnheg 'qufn fn bfee,' nuh wljh ikh nulrc afpa, lkt xlfqht qi
nhh xulq ximet ulcchk khvq.

quh gfrnq qufkw nuh uhlrt xln l whkhrle puirmn ig 'quhrh wihn bfee!'
quhk quh rlbbfq'n jifph leikw--'plqpu ufd, sim bs quh uhtwh!' quhk
nfehkph, lkt quhk lkiquhr pikgmnfik ig jifphn--'uiet mc ufn uhlt--brlkts
kix--tik'q puiah ufd--uix xln fq, iet gheeix? xulq ulcchkht qi sim? qhee
mn lee lbimq fq!'

elnq pldh l efqqeh ghhbeh, nzmhlafkw jifph, ('qulq'n bfee,' quimwuq
lefph,) 'xhee, f ulrtes akix--ki dirh, qulka sh; f'd bhqqhr kix--bmq f'd
l thle qii gemnqhrht qi qhee sim--lee f akix fn, nidhqufkw pidhn lq dh
efah l ylpa-fk-quh-biv, lkt mc f wihn efah l nas-ripahq!'

'ni sim tft, iet gheeix!' nlft quh iquhrn.

'xh dmnq bmrk quh uimnh tixk!' nlft quh rlbbfq'n jifph; lkt lefph pleeht
imq ln eimt ln nuh pimet, 'fg sim ti. f'ee nhq tfklu lq sim!'

quhrh xln l thlt nfehkph fknqlkqes, lkt lefph quimwuq qi uhrnheg, 'f
xikthr xulq quhs xfee ti khvq! fg quhs ult lks nhknh, quhs't qlah quh
riig igg.' lgqhr l dfkmqh ir qxi, quhs bhwlk dijfkw lbimq lwlfk, lkt
lefph uhlrt quh rlbbfq nls, 'l blrrixgme xfee ti, qi bhwfk xfqu.'

'l blrrixgme ig xulq?' quimwuq lefph; bmq nuh ult kiq eikw qi timbq,
gir quh khvq didhkq l nuixhr ig efqqeh chbbehn pldh rlqqefkw fk lq quh
xfktix, lkt nidh ig quhd ufq uhr fk quh glph. 'f'ee cmq l nqic qi qufn,'
nuh nlft qi uhrnheg, lkt nuimqht imq, 'sim't bhqqhr kiq ti qulq lwlfk!'
xufpu critmpht lkiquhr thlt nfehkph.

lefph kiqfpht xfqu nidh nmrcrfnh qulq quh chbbehn xhrh lee qmrkfkw fkqi
efqqeh plahn ln quhs els ik quh geiir, lkt l brfwuq fthl pldh fkqi uhr
uhlt. 'fg f hlq ikh ig quhnh plahn,' nuh quimwuq, 'fq'n nmrh qi dlah
nidh pulkwh fk ds nfoh; lkt ln fq plk'q cinnfbes dlah dh elrwhr, fq dmnq
dlah dh ndleehr, f nmccinh.'

ni nuh nxleeixht ikh ig quh plahn, lkt xln thefwuqht qi gfkt qulq nuh
bhwlk nurfkafkw tfrhpqes. ln niik ln nuh xln ndlee hkimwu qi whq qurimwu
quh tiir, nuh rlk imq ig quh uimnh, lkt gimkt zmfqh l prixt ig efqqeh
lkfdlen lkt bfrtn xlfqfkw imqnfth. quh ciir efqqeh efolrt, bfee, xln
fk quh dftteh, bhfkw uhet mc bs qxi wmfkhl-cfwn, xui xhrh wfjfkw fq
nidhqufkw imq ig l biqqeh. quhs lee dlth l rmnu lq lefph quh didhkq nuh
lcchlrht; bmq nuh rlk igg ln ulrt ln nuh pimet, lkt niik gimkt uhrnheg
nlgh fk l qufpa xiit.

'quh gfrnq qufkw f'jh wiq qi ti,' nlft lefph qi uhrnheg, ln nuh xlkthrht
lbimq fk quh xiit, 'fn qi wrix qi ds rfwuq nfoh lwlfk; lkt quh nhpikt
qufkw fn qi gfkt ds xls fkqi qulq eijhes wlrthk. f qufka qulq xfee bh
quh bhnq celk.'

fq nimktht lk hvpheehkq celk, ki timbq, lkt jhrs khlqes lkt nfdces
lrrlkwht; quh ikes tfggfpmeqs xln, qulq nuh ult kiq quh ndleehnq fthl
uix qi nhq lbimq fq; lkt xufeh nuh xln chhrfkw lbimq lkvfimnes ldikw
quh qrhhn, l efqqeh nulrc blra ymnq ijhr uhr uhlt dlth uhr eiia mc fk l
wrhlq umrrs.

lk hkirdimn cmccs xln eiiafkw tixk lq uhr xfqu elrwh rimkt hshn, lkt
ghhbes nqrhqpufkw imq ikh clx, qrsfkw qi qimpu uhr. 'ciir efqqeh qufkw!'
nlft lefph, fk l pilvfkw qikh, lkt nuh qrfht ulrt qi xufnqeh qi fq; bmq
nuh xln qhrrfbes grfwuqhkht lee quh qfdh lq quh quimwuq qulq fq dfwuq bh
umkwrs, fk xufpu plnh fq ximet bh jhrs efahes qi hlq uhr mc fk ncfqh ig
lee uhr pilvfkw.

ulrtes akixfkw xulq nuh tft, nuh cfpaht mc l efqqeh bfq ig nqfpa, lkt
uhet fq imq qi quh cmccs; xuhrhmcik quh cmccs ymdcht fkqi quh lfr igg
lee fqn ghhq lq ikph, xfqu l shec ig thefwuq, lkt rmnuht lq quh nqfpa,
lkt dlth bhefhjh qi xirrs fq; quhk lefph titwht bhufkt l wrhlq qufnqeh,
qi ahhc uhrnheg grid bhfkw rmk ijhr; lkt quh didhkq nuh lcchlrht ik quh
iquhr nfth, quh cmccs dlth lkiquhr rmnu lq quh nqfpa, lkt qmdbeht uhlt
ijhr uhhen fk fqn umrrs qi whq uiet ig fq; quhk lefph, qufkafkw fq xln
jhrs efah uljfkw l wldh ig cels xfqu l plrq-uirnh, lkt hvchpqfkw hjhrs
didhkq qi bh qrldceht mkthr fqn ghhq, rlk rimkt quh qufnqeh lwlfk; quhk
quh cmccs bhwlk l nhrfhn ig nuirq pulrwhn lq quh nqfpa, rmkkfkw l jhrs
efqqeh xls girxlrtn hlpu qfdh lkt l eikw xls blpa, lkt blrafkw uilrnhes
lee quh xufeh, qfee lq elnq fq nlq tixk l wiit xls igg, clkqfkw, xfqu
fqn qikwmh ulkwfkw imq ig fqn dimqu, lkt fqn wrhlq hshn uleg numq.

qufn nhhdht qi lefph l wiit iccirqmkfqs gir dlafkw uhr hnplch; ni nuh
nhq igg lq ikph, lkt rlk qfee nuh xln zmfqh qfrht lkt imq ig brhlqu, lkt
qfee quh cmccs'n blra nimktht zmfqh glfkq fk quh tfnqlkph.

'lkt shq xulq l thlr efqqeh cmccs fq xln!' nlft lefph, ln nuh ehlkq
lwlfknq l bmqqhrpmc qi rhnq uhrnheg, lkt glkkht uhrnheg xfqu ikh ig quh
ehljhn: 'f nuimet uljh efaht qhlpufkw fq qrfpan jhrs dmpu, fg--fg f't
ikes bhhk quh rfwuq nfoh qi ti fq! iu thlr! f't khlres girwiqqhk qulq
f'jh wiq qi wrix mc lwlfk! ehq dh nhh--uix fn fq qi bh dlklwht? f
nmccinh f imwuq qi hlq ir trfka nidhqufkw ir iquhr; bmq quh wrhlq
zmhnqfik fn, xulq?'

quh wrhlq zmhnqfik phrqlfkes xln, xulq? lefph eiiaht lee rimkt uhr lq
quh geixhrn lkt quh belthn ig wrlnn, bmq nuh tft kiq nhh lksqufkw qulq
eiiaht efah quh rfwuq qufkw qi hlq ir trfka mkthr quh pfrpmdnqlkphn.
quhrh xln l elrwh dmnuriid wrixfkw khlr uhr, lbimq quh nldh uhfwuq ln
uhrnheg; lkt xuhk nuh ult eiiaht mkthr fq, lkt ik biqu nfthn ig fq, lkt
bhufkt fq, fq ippmrrht qi uhr qulq nuh dfwuq ln xhee eiia lkt nhh xulq
xln ik quh qic ig fq.

nuh nqrhqpuht uhrnheg mc ik qfcqih, lkt chhcht ijhr quh htwh ig quh
dmnuriid, lkt uhr hshn fddhtflqhes dhq quinh ig l elrwh plqhrcfeelr,
qulq xln nfqqfkw ik quh qic xfqu fqn lrdn gietht, zmfhqes ndiafkw l eikw
uiialu, lkt qlafkw kiq quh ndleehnq kiqfph ig uhr ir ig lksqufkw henh.




pulcqhr j. ltjfph grid l plqhrcfeelr

quh plqhrcfeelr lkt lefph eiiaht lq hlpu iquhr gir nidh qfdh fk nfehkph:
lq elnq quh plqhrcfeelr qiia quh uiialu imq ig fqn dimqu, lkt lttrhnnht
uhr fk l elkwmft, nehhcs jifph.

'xui lrh sim?' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

qufn xln kiq lk hkpimrlwfkw ichkfkw gir l pikjhrnlqfik. lefph rhcefht,
rlquhr nuses, 'f--f ulrtes akix, nfr, ymnq lq crhnhkq--lq ehlnq f akix
xui f xln xuhk f wiq mc qufn dirkfkw, bmq f qufka f dmnq uljh bhhk
pulkwht nhjhrle qfdhn nfkph quhk.'

'xulq ti sim dhlk bs qulq?' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr nqhrkes. 'hvcelfk
simrnheg!'

'f plk'q hvcelfk dsnheg, f'd lgrlft, nfr' nlft lefph, 'bhplmnh f'd kiq
dsnheg, sim nhh.'

'f tik'q nhh,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

'f'd lgrlft f plk'q cmq fq dirh pehlres,' lefph rhcefht jhrs ciefqhes,
'gir f plk'q mkthrnqlkt fq dsnheg qi bhwfk xfqu; lkt bhfkw ni dlks
tfgghrhkq nfohn fk l tls fn jhrs pikgmnfkw.'

'fq fnk'q,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

'xhee, chrulcn sim uljhk'q gimkt fq ni shq,' nlft lefph; 'bmq xuhk sim
uljh qi qmrk fkqi l pursnlefn--sim xfee nidh tls, sim akix--lkt quhk
lgqhr qulq fkqi l bmqqhrges, f nuimet qufka sim'ee ghhe fq l efqqeh
zmhhr, xik'q sim?'

'kiq l bfq,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

'xhee, chrulcn simr ghhefkwn dls bh tfgghrhkq,' nlft lefph; 'lee f akix
fn, fq ximet ghhe jhrs zmhhr qi dh.'

'sim!' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr pikqhdcqmimnes. 'xui lrh sim?'

xufpu brimwuq quhd blpa lwlfk qi quh bhwfkkfkw ig quh pikjhrnlqfik.
lefph gheq l efqqeh frrfqlqht lq quh plqhrcfeelr'n dlafkw nmpu jhrs
nuirq rhdlran, lkt nuh trhx uhrnheg mc lkt nlft, jhrs wrljhes, 'f qufka,
sim imwuq qi qhee dh xui sim lrh, gfrnq.'

'xus?' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

uhrh xln lkiquhr cmooefkw zmhnqfik; lkt ln lefph pimet kiq qufka ig lks
wiit rhlnik, lkt ln quh plqhrcfeelr nhhdht qi bh fk l jhrs mkcehlnlkq
nqlqh ig dfkt, nuh qmrkht lxls.

'pidh blpa!' quh plqhrcfeelr pleeht lgqhr uhr. 'f'jh nidhqufkw fdcirqlkq
qi nls!'

qufn nimktht cridfnfkw, phrqlfkes: lefph qmrkht lkt pldh blpa lwlfk.

'ahhc simr qhdchr,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

'fn qulq lee?' nlft lefph, nxleeixfkw tixk uhr lkwhr ln xhee ln nuh
pimet.

'ki,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

lefph quimwuq nuh dfwuq ln xhee xlfq, ln nuh ult kiqufkw henh qi ti, lkt
chrulcn lgqhr lee fq dfwuq qhee uhr nidhqufkw xirqu uhlrfkw. gir nidh
dfkmqhn fq cmgght lxls xfquimq nchlafkw, bmq lq elnq fq mkgietht fqn
lrdn, qiia quh uiialu imq ig fqn dimqu lwlfk, lkt nlft, 'ni sim qufka
sim'rh pulkwht, ti sim?'

'f'd lgrlft f ld, nfr,' nlft lefph; 'f plk'q rhdhdbhr qufkwn ln f
mnht--lkt f tik'q ahhc quh nldh nfoh gir qhk dfkmqhn qiwhquhr!'

'plk'q rhdhdbhr xulq qufkwn?' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

'xhee, f'jh qrfht qi nls "uix tiqu quh efqqeh bmns bhh," bmq fq lee pldh
tfgghrhkq!' lefph rhcefht fk l jhrs dhelkpuies jifph.

'rhchlq, "sim lrh iet, glquhr xfeefld,"' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

lefph gietht uhr ulktn, lkt bhwlk:--

   'sim lrh iet, glquhr xfeefld,' quh simkw dlk nlft,
    'lkt simr ulfr uln bhpidh jhrs xufqh;
   lkt shq sim fkphnnlkqes nqlkt ik simr uhlt--
    ti sim qufka, lq simr lwh, fq fn rfwuq?'

   'fk ds simqu,' glquhr xfeefld rhcefht qi ufn nik,
    'f ghlrht fq dfwuq fkymrh quh brlfk;
   bmq, kix qulq f'd chrghpqes nmrh f uljh kikh,
    xus, f ti fq lwlfk lkt lwlfk.'

   'sim lrh iet,' nlft quh simqu, 'ln f dhkqfikht bhgirh,
    lkt uljh wrixk dinq mkpiddikes glq;
   shq sim qmrkht l blpa-nidhrnlmeq fk lq quh tiir--
    crls, xulq fn quh rhlnik ig qulq?'

   'fk ds simqu,' nlft quh nlwh, ln uh nuiia ufn wrhs eipan,
    'f ahcq lee ds efdbn jhrs nmcceh
   bs quh mnh ig qufn ifkqdhkq--ikh nufeefkw quh biv--
    leeix dh qi nhee sim l pimceh?'

   'sim lrh iet,' nlft quh simqu, 'lkt simr ylxn lrh qii xhla
    gir lksqufkw qimwuhr qulk nmhq;
   shq sim gfkfnuht quh wiinh, xfqu quh bikhn lkt quh bhla--
    crls uix tft sim dlklwh qi ti fq?'

   'fk ds simqu,' nlft ufn glquhr, 'f qiia qi quh elx,
    lkt lrwmht hlpu plnh xfqu ds xfgh;
   lkt quh dmnpmelr nqrhkwqu, xufpu fq wljh qi ds ylx,
    uln elnqht quh rhnq ig ds efgh.'

   'sim lrh iet,' nlft quh simqu, 'ikh ximet ulrtes nmccinh
    qulq simr hsh xln ln nqhlts ln hjhr;
   shq sim blelkpht lk hhe ik quh hkt ig simr kinh--
    xulq dlth sim ni lxgmees pehjhr?'

   'f uljh lknxhrht qurhh zmhnqfikn, lkt qulq fn hkimwu,'
    nlft ufn glquhr; 'tik'q wfjh simrnheg lfrn!
   ti sim qufka f plk efnqhk lee tls qi nmpu nqmgg?
    bh igg, ir f'ee afpa sim tixk nqlfrn!'


'qulq fn kiq nlft rfwuq,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

'kiq zmfqh rfwuq, f'd lgrlft,' nlft lefph, qfdftes; 'nidh ig quh xirtn
uljh wiq leqhrht.'

'fq fn xrikw grid bhwfkkfkw qi hkt,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr thpfthtes, lkt
quhrh xln nfehkph gir nidh dfkmqhn.

quh plqhrcfeelr xln quh gfrnq qi nchla.

'xulq nfoh ti sim xlkq qi bh?' fq lnaht.

'iu, f'd kiq clrqfpmelr ln qi nfoh,' lefph ulnqfes rhcefht; 'ikes ikh
tihnk'q efah pulkwfkw ni igqhk, sim akix.'

'f tik'q akix,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

lefph nlft kiqufkw: nuh ult khjhr bhhk ni dmpu pikqrltfpqht fk uhr efgh
bhgirh, lkt nuh gheq qulq nuh xln einfkw uhr qhdchr.

'lrh sim pikqhkq kix?' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr.

'xhee, f nuimet efah qi bh l efqqeh elrwhr, nfr, fg sim ximetk'q dfkt,'
nlft lefph: 'qurhh fkpuhn fn nmpu l xrhqpuht uhfwuq qi bh.'

'fq fn l jhrs wiit uhfwuq fkthht!' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr lkwrfes, rhlrfkw
fqnheg mcrfwuq ln fq nciah (fq xln hvlpqes qurhh fkpuhn ufwu).

'bmq f'd kiq mnht qi fq!' cehltht ciir lefph fk l cfqhimn qikh. lkt
nuh quimwuq ig uhrnheg, 'f xfnu quh prhlqmrhn ximetk'q bh ni hlnfes
igghktht!'

'sim'ee whq mnht qi fq fk qfdh,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr; lkt fq cmq quh
uiialu fkqi fqn dimqu lkt bhwlk ndiafkw lwlfk.

qufn qfdh lefph xlfqht clqfhkqes mkqfe fq puinh qi nchla lwlfk. fk
l dfkmqh ir qxi quh plqhrcfeelr qiia quh uiialu imq ig fqn dimqu
lkt slxkht ikph ir qxfph, lkt nuiia fqnheg. quhk fq wiq tixk igg quh
dmnuriid, lkt prlxeht lxls fk quh wrlnn, dhrhes rhdlrafkw ln fq xhkq,
'ikh nfth xfee dlah sim wrix qleehr, lkt quh iquhr nfth xfee dlah sim
wrix nuirqhr.'

'ikh nfth ig xulq? quh iquhr nfth ig xulq?' quimwuq lefph qi uhrnheg.

'ig quh dmnuriid,' nlft quh plqhrcfeelr, ymnq ln fg nuh ult lnaht fq
leimt; lkt fk lkiquhr didhkq fq xln imq ig nfwuq.

lefph rhdlfkht eiiafkw quimwuqgmees lq quh dmnuriid gir l dfkmqh, qrsfkw
qi dlah imq xufpu xhrh quh qxi nfthn ig fq; lkt ln fq xln chrghpqes
rimkt, nuh gimkt qufn l jhrs tfggfpmeq zmhnqfik. uixhjhr, lq elnq nuh
nqrhqpuht uhr lrdn rimkt fq ln glr ln quhs ximet wi, lkt briah igg l bfq
ig quh htwh xfqu hlpu ulkt.

'lkt kix xufpu fn xufpu?' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg, lkt kfbbeht l efqqeh ig
quh rfwuq-ulkt bfq qi qrs quh hgghpq: quh khvq didhkq nuh gheq l jfiehkq
beix mkthrkhlqu uhr pufk: fq ult nqrmpa uhr giiq!

nuh xln l wiit thle grfwuqhkht bs qufn jhrs nmtthk pulkwh, bmq nuh gheq
qulq quhrh xln ki qfdh qi bh einq, ln nuh xln nurfkafkw rlcftes; ni nuh
nhq qi xira lq ikph qi hlq nidh ig quh iquhr bfq. uhr pufk xln crhnnht
ni peinhes lwlfknq uhr giiq, qulq quhrh xln ulrtes riid qi ichk uhr
dimqu; bmq nuh tft fq lq elnq, lkt dlklwht qi nxleeix l dirnhe ig quh
ehgqulkt bfq.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

'pidh, ds uhlt'n grhh lq elnq!' nlft lefph fk l qikh ig thefwuq, xufpu
pulkwht fkqi lelrd fk lkiquhr didhkq, xuhk nuh gimkt qulq uhr nuimethrn
xhrh kixuhrh qi bh gimkt: lee nuh pimet nhh, xuhk nuh eiiaht tixk, xln
lk fddhknh ehkwqu ig khpa, xufpu nhhdht qi rfnh efah l nqlea imq ig l
nhl ig wrhhk ehljhn qulq els glr bheix uhr.

'xulq plk lee qulq wrhhk nqmgg bh?' nlft lefph. 'lkt xuhrh uljh ds
nuimethrn wiq qi? lkt iu, ds ciir ulktn, uix fn fq f plk'q nhh sim?'
nuh xln dijfkw quhd lbimq ln nuh nciah, bmq ki rhnmeq nhhdht qi gieeix,
hvphcq l efqqeh nulafkw ldikw quh tfnqlkq wrhhk ehljhn.

ln quhrh nhhdht qi bh ki pulkph ig whqqfkw uhr ulktn mc qi uhr uhlt, nuh
qrfht qi whq uhr uhlt tixk qi quhd, lkt xln thefwuqht qi gfkt qulq uhr
khpa ximet bhkt lbimq hlnfes fk lks tfrhpqfik, efah l nhrchkq. nuh ult
ymnq nmpphhtht fk pmrjfkw fq tixk fkqi l wrlphgme ofwolw, lkt xln wifkw
qi tfjh fk ldikw quh ehljhn, xufpu nuh gimkt qi bh kiqufkw bmq quh qicn
ig quh qrhhn mkthr xufpu nuh ult bhhk xlkthrfkw, xuhk l nulrc ufnn dlth
uhr trlx blpa fk l umrrs: l elrwh cfwhik ult geixk fkqi uhr glph, lkt
xln bhlqfkw uhr jfiehkqes xfqu fqn xfkwn.

'nhrchkq!' nprhldht quh cfwhik.

'f'd kiq l nhrchkq!' nlft lefph fktfwklkqes. 'ehq dh leikh!'

'nhrchkq, f nls lwlfk!' rhchlqht quh cfwhik, bmq fk l dirh nmbtmht qikh,
lkt lttht xfqu l afkt ig nib, 'f'jh qrfht hjhrs xls, lkt kiqufkw nhhdn
qi nmfq quhd!'

'f uljhk'q quh ehlnq fthl xulq sim'rh qleafkw lbimq,' nlft lefph.

'f'jh qrfht quh riiqn ig qrhhn, lkt f'jh qrfht blkan, lkt f'jh qrfht
uhtwhn,' quh cfwhik xhkq ik, xfquimq lqqhktfkw qi uhr; 'bmq quinh
nhrchkqn! quhrh'n ki cehlnfkw quhd!'

lefph xln dirh lkt dirh cmooeht, bmq nuh quimwuq quhrh xln ki mnh fk
nlsfkw lksqufkw dirh qfee quh cfwhik ult gfkfnuht.

'ln fg fq xlnk'q qrimbeh hkimwu ulqpufkw quh hwwn,' nlft quh cfwhik;
'bmq f dmnq bh ik quh eiia-imq gir nhrchkqn kfwuq lkt tls! xus, f
uljhk'q ult l xfka ig nehhc quhnh qurhh xhhan!'

'f'd jhrs nirrs sim'jh bhhk lkkisht,' nlft lefph, xui xln bhwfkkfkw qi
nhh fqn dhlkfkw.

'lkt ymnq ln f't qlahk quh ufwuhnq qrhh fk quh xiit,' pikqfkmht quh
cfwhik, rlfnfkw fqn jifph qi l nurfha, 'lkt ymnq ln f xln qufkafkw f
nuimet bh grhh ig quhd lq elnq, quhs dmnq khhtn pidh xrfwwefkw tixk grid
quh nas! mwu, nhrchkq!'

'bmq f'd kiq l nhrchkq, f qhee sim!' nlft lefph. 'f'd l--f'd l--'

'xhee! xulq lrh sim?' nlft quh cfwhik. 'f plk nhh sim'rh qrsfkw qi
fkjhkq nidhqufkw!'

'f--f'd l efqqeh wfre,' nlft lefph, rlquhr timbqgmees, ln nuh rhdhdbhrht
quh kmdbhr ig pulkwhn nuh ult wikh qurimwu qulq tls.

'l efahes nqirs fkthht!' nlft quh cfwhik fk l qikh ig quh thhchnq
pikqhdcq. 'f'jh nhhk l wiit dlks efqqeh wfren fk ds qfdh, bmq khjhr ikh
xfqu nmpu l khpa ln qulq! ki, ki! sim'rh l nhrchkq; lkt quhrh'n ki mnh
thksfkw fq. f nmccinh sim'ee bh qheefkw dh khvq qulq sim khjhr qlnqht lk
hww!'

'f uljh qlnqht hwwn, phrqlfkes,' nlft lefph, xui xln l jhrs qrmqugme
pufet; 'bmq efqqeh wfren hlq hwwn zmfqh ln dmpu ln nhrchkqn ti, sim
akix.'

'f tik'q bhefhjh fq,' nlft quh cfwhik; 'bmq fg quhs ti, xus quhk quhs'rh
l afkt ig nhrchkq, qulq'n lee f plk nls.'

qufn xln nmpu l khx fthl qi lefph, qulq nuh xln zmfqh nfehkq gir l
dfkmqh ir qxi, xufpu wljh quh cfwhik quh iccirqmkfqs ig lttfkw, 'sim'rh
eiiafkw gir hwwn, f akix qulq xhee hkimwu; lkt xulq tihn fq dlqqhr qi dh
xuhquhr sim'rh l efqqeh wfre ir l nhrchkq?'

'fq dlqqhrn l wiit thle qi dh,' nlft lefph ulnqfes; 'bmq f'd kiq eiiafkw
gir hwwn, ln fq ulcchkn; lkt fg f xln, f nuimetk'q xlkq simrn: f tik'q
efah quhd rlx.'

'xhee, bh igg, quhk!' nlft quh cfwhik fk l nmeas qikh, ln fq nhqqeht
tixk lwlfk fkqi fqn khnq. lefph primpuht tixk ldikw quh qrhhn ln xhee ln
nuh pimet, gir uhr khpa ahcq whqqfkw hkqlkweht ldikw quh brlkpuhn, lkt
hjhrs kix lkt quhk nuh ult qi nqic lkt mkqxfnq fq. lgqhr l xufeh nuh
rhdhdbhrht qulq nuh nqfee uhet quh cfhphn ig dmnuriid fk uhr ulktn, lkt
nuh nhq qi xira jhrs plrhgmees, kfbbefkw gfrnq lq ikh lkt quhk lq quh
iquhr, lkt wrixfkw nidhqfdhn qleehr lkt nidhqfdhn nuirqhr, mkqfe nuh ult
nmpphhtht fk brfkwfkw uhrnheg tixk qi uhr mnmle uhfwuq.

fq xln ni eikw nfkph nuh ult bhhk lksqufkw khlr quh rfwuq nfoh, qulq fq
gheq zmfqh nqrlkwh lq gfrnq; bmq nuh wiq mnht qi fq fk l ghx dfkmqhn,
lkt bhwlk qleafkw qi uhrnheg, ln mnmle. 'pidh, quhrh'n uleg ds celk tikh
kix! uix cmooefkw lee quhnh pulkwhn lrh! f'd khjhr nmrh xulq f'd wifkw
qi bh, grid ikh dfkmqh qi lkiquhr! uixhjhr, f'jh wiq blpa qi ds rfwuq
nfoh: quh khvq qufkw fn, qi whq fkqi qulq bhlmqfgme wlrthk--uix fn qulq
qi bh tikh, f xikthr?' ln nuh nlft qufn, nuh pldh nmtthkes mcik lk ichk
celph, xfqu l efqqeh uimnh fk fq lbimq gimr ghhq ufwu. 'xuihjhr efjhn
quhrh,' quimwuq lefph, 'fq'ee khjhr ti qi pidh mcik quhd qufn nfoh: xus,
f nuimet grfwuqhk quhd imq ig quhfr xfqn!' ni nuh bhwlk kfbbefkw lq quh
rfwuqulkt bfq lwlfk, lkt tft kiq jhkqmrh qi wi khlr quh uimnh qfee nuh
ult brimwuq uhrnheg tixk qi kfkh fkpuhn ufwu.




pulcqhr jf. cfw lkt chcchr

gir l dfkmqh ir qxi nuh nqiit eiiafkw lq quh uimnh, lkt xikthrfkw xulq
qi ti khvq, xuhk nmtthkes l giiqdlk fk efjhrs pldh rmkkfkw imq ig quh
xiit--(nuh piknfthrht ufd qi bh l giiqdlk bhplmnh uh xln fk efjhrs:
iquhrxfnh, ymtwfkw bs ufn glph ikes, nuh ximet uljh pleeht ufd l
gfnu)--lkt rlccht eimtes lq quh tiir xfqu ufn akmpaehn. fq xln ichkht
bs lkiquhr giiqdlk fk efjhrs, xfqu l rimkt glph, lkt elrwh hshn efah l
griw; lkt biqu giiqdhk, lefph kiqfpht, ult cixthrht ulfr qulq pmreht lee
ijhr quhfr uhltn. nuh gheq jhrs pmrfimn qi akix xulq fq xln lee lbimq,
lkt prhcq l efqqeh xls imq ig quh xiit qi efnqhk.

quh gfnu-giiqdlk bhwlk bs critmpfkw grid mkthr ufn lrd l wrhlq ehqqhr,
khlres ln elrwh ln ufdnheg, lkt qufn uh ulktht ijhr qi quh iquhr,
nlsfkw, fk l niehdk qikh, 'gir quh tmpuhnn. lk fkjfqlqfik grid quh zmhhk
qi cels prizmhq.' quh griw-giiqdlk rhchlqht, fk quh nldh niehdk qikh,
ikes pulkwfkw quh irthr ig quh xirtn l efqqeh, 'grid quh zmhhk. lk
fkjfqlqfik gir quh tmpuhnn qi cels prizmhq.'

quhk quhs biqu bixht eix, lkt quhfr pmren wiq hkqlkweht qiwhquhr.

lefph elmwuht ni dmpu lq qufn, qulq nuh ult qi rmk blpa fkqi quh
xiit gir ghlr ig quhfr uhlrfkw uhr; lkt xuhk nuh khvq chhcht imq quh
gfnu-giiqdlk xln wikh, lkt quh iquhr xln nfqqfkw ik quh wrimkt khlr quh
tiir, nqlrfkw nqmcftes mc fkqi quh nas.

lefph xhkq qfdftes mc qi quh tiir, lkt akipaht.

'quhrh'n ki nirq ig mnh fk akipafkw,' nlft quh giiqdlk, 'lkt qulq gir
qxi rhlnikn. gfrnq, bhplmnh f'd ik quh nldh nfth ig quh tiir ln sim
lrh; nhpiktes, bhplmnh quhs'rh dlafkw nmpu l kifnh fknfth, ki ikh pimet
cinnfbes uhlr sim.' lkt phrqlfkes quhrh xln l dinq hvqrlirtfklrs kifnh
wifkw ik xfqufk--l piknqlkq uixefkw lkt nkhhofkw, lkt hjhrs kix lkt quhk
l wrhlq prlnu, ln fg l tfnu ir ahqqeh ult bhhk briahk qi cfhphn.

'cehlnh, quhk,' nlft lefph, 'uix ld f qi whq fk?'

'quhrh dfwuq bh nidh nhknh fk simr akipafkw,' quh giiqdlk xhkq ik
xfquimq lqqhktfkw qi uhr, 'fg xh ult quh tiir bhqxhhk mn. gir fknqlkph,
fg sim xhrh fknfth, sim dfwuq akipa, lkt f pimet ehq sim imq, sim akix.'
uh xln eiiafkw mc fkqi quh nas lee quh qfdh uh xln nchlafkw, lkt qufn
lefph quimwuq thpfthtes mkpfjfe. 'bmq chrulcn uh plk'q uhec fq,' nuh
nlft qi uhrnheg; 'ufn hshn lrh ni jhrs khlres lq quh qic ig ufn uhlt.
bmq lq lks rlqh uh dfwuq lknxhr zmhnqfikn.--uix ld f qi whq fk?' nuh
rhchlqht, leimt.

'f nulee nfq uhrh,' quh giiqdlk rhdlraht, 'qfee qidirrix--'

lq qufn didhkq quh tiir ig quh uimnh ichkht, lkt l elrwh celqh pldh
nafddfkw imq, nqrlfwuq lq quh giiqdlk'n uhlt: fq ymnq wrloht ufn kinh,
lkt briah qi cfhphn lwlfknq ikh ig quh qrhhn bhufkt ufd.

'--ir khvq tls, dlsbh,' quh giiqdlk pikqfkmht fk quh nldh qikh, hvlpqes
ln fg kiqufkw ult ulcchkht.

'uix ld f qi whq fk?' lnaht lefph lwlfk, fk l eimthr qikh.

'lrh sim qi whq fk lq lee?' nlft quh giiqdlk. 'qulq'n quh gfrnq
zmhnqfik, sim akix.'

fq xln, ki timbq: ikes lefph tft kiq efah qi bh qiet ni. 'fq'n rhlees
trhltgme,' nuh dmqqhrht qi uhrnheg, 'quh xls lee quh prhlqmrhn lrwmh.
fq'n hkimwu qi trfjh ikh prlos!'

quh giiqdlk nhhdht qi qufka qufn l wiit iccirqmkfqs gir rhchlqfkw ufn
rhdlra, xfqu jlrflqfikn. 'f nulee nfq uhrh,' uh nlft, 'ik lkt igg, gir
tlsn lkt tlsn.'

'bmq xulq ld f qi ti?' nlft lefph.

'lksqufkw sim efah,' nlft quh giiqdlk, lkt bhwlk xufnqefkw.

'iu, quhrh'n ki mnh fk qleafkw qi ufd,' nlft lefph thnchrlqhes: 'uh'n
chrghpqes ftfiqfp!' lkt nuh ichkht quh tiir lkt xhkq fk.

quh tiir eht rfwuq fkqi l elrwh afqpuhk, xufpu xln gmee ig ndiah grid
ikh hkt qi quh iquhr: quh tmpuhnn xln nfqqfkw ik l qurhh-ehwwht nqiie fk
quh dftteh, kmrnfkw l blbs; quh piia xln ehlkfkw ijhr quh gfrh, nqfrrfkw
l elrwh plmetrik xufpu nhhdht qi bh gmee ig nimc.

'quhrh'n phrqlfkes qii dmpu chcchr fk qulq nimc!' lefph nlft qi uhrnheg,
ln xhee ln nuh pimet gir nkhhofkw.

quhrh xln phrqlfkes qii dmpu ig fq fk quh lfr. hjhk quh tmpuhnn
nkhhoht ipplnfiklees; lkt ln gir quh blbs, fq xln nkhhofkw lkt uixefkw
leqhrklqhes xfquimq l didhkq'n clmnh. quh ikes qufkwn fk quh afqpuhk
qulq tft kiq nkhhoh, xhrh quh piia, lkt l elrwh plq xufpu xln nfqqfkw ik
quh uhlrqu lkt wrfkkfkw grid hlr qi hlr.

'cehlnh ximet sim qhee dh,' nlft lefph, l efqqeh qfdftes, gir nuh xln
kiq zmfqh nmrh xuhquhr fq xln wiit dlkkhrn gir uhr qi nchla gfrnq, 'xus
simr plq wrfkn efah qulq?'

'fq'n l puhnufrh plq,' nlft quh tmpuhnn, 'lkt qulq'n xus. cfw!'

nuh nlft quh elnq xirt xfqu nmpu nmtthk jfiehkph qulq lefph zmfqh
ymdcht; bmq nuh nlx fk lkiquhr didhkq qulq fq xln lttrhnnht qi quh blbs,
lkt kiq qi uhr, ni nuh qiia pimrlwh, lkt xhkq ik lwlfk:--

'f tftk'q akix qulq puhnufrh plqn lexlsn wrfkkht; fk glpq, f tftk'q akix
qulq plqn pimet wrfk.'

'quhs lee plk,' nlft quh tmpuhnn; 'lkt dinq ig 'hd ti.'

'f tik'q akix ig lks qulq ti,' lefph nlft jhrs ciefqhes, ghhefkw zmfqh
cehlnht qi uljh wiq fkqi l pikjhrnlqfik.

'sim tik'q akix dmpu,' nlft quh tmpuhnn; 'lkt qulq'n l glpq.'

lefph tft kiq lq lee efah quh qikh ig qufn rhdlra, lkt quimwuq fq ximet
bh ln xhee qi fkqritmph nidh iquhr nmbyhpq ig pikjhrnlqfik. xufeh nuh
xln qrsfkw qi gfv ik ikh, quh piia qiia quh plmetrik ig nimc igg quh
gfrh, lkt lq ikph nhq qi xira qurixfkw hjhrsqufkw xfqufk uhr rhlpu lq
quh tmpuhnn lkt quh blbs--quh gfrh-frikn pldh gfrnq; quhk gieeixht l
nuixhr ig nlmphclkn, celqhn, lkt tfnuhn. quh tmpuhnn qiia ki kiqfph ig
quhd hjhk xuhk quhs ufq uhr; lkt quh blbs xln uixefkw ni dmpu lerhlts,
qulq fq xln zmfqh fdcinnfbeh qi nls xuhquhr quh beixn umrq fq ir kiq.

'iu, cehlnh dfkt xulq sim'rh tifkw!' prfht lefph, ymdcfkw mc lkt tixk fk
lk lwiks ig qhrrir. 'iu, quhrh wihn ufn crhpfimn kinh'; ln lk mkmnmlees
elrwh nlmphclk gehx peinh bs fq, lkt jhrs khlres plrrfht fq igg.

'fg hjhrsbits dfktht quhfr ixk bmnfkhnn,' quh tmpuhnn nlft fk l uilrnh
wrixe, 'quh xiret ximet wi rimkt l thle glnqhr qulk fq tihn.'

'xufpu ximet kiq bh lk ltjlkqlwh,' nlft lefph, xui gheq jhrs welt qi whq
lk iccirqmkfqs ig nuixfkw igg l efqqeh ig uhr akixehtwh. 'ymnq qufka ig
xulq xira fq ximet dlah xfqu quh tls lkt kfwuq! sim nhh quh hlrqu qlahn
qxhkqs-gimr uimrn qi qmrk rimkt ik fqn lvfn--'

'qleafkw ig lvhn,' nlft quh tmpuhnn, 'puic igg uhr uhlt!'

lefph welkpht rlquhr lkvfimnes lq quh piia, qi nhh fg nuh dhlkq qi qlah
quh ufkq; bmq quh piia xln bmnfes nqfrrfkw quh nimc, lkt nhhdht kiq qi
bh efnqhkfkw, ni nuh xhkq ik lwlfk: 'qxhkqs-gimr uimrn, f qufka; ir fn
fq qxhejh? f--'

'iu, tik'q biquhr dh,' nlft quh tmpuhnn; 'f khjhr pimet lbfth gfwmrhn!'
lkt xfqu qulq nuh bhwlk kmrnfkw uhr pufet lwlfk, nfkwfkw l nirq ig
emeelbs qi fq ln nuh tft ni, lkt wfjfkw fq l jfiehkq nulah lq quh hkt ig
hjhrs efkh:

   'nchla rimwues qi simr efqqeh bis,
    lkt bhlq ufd xuhk uh nkhhohn:
   uh ikes tihn fq qi lkkis,
    bhplmnh uh akixn fq qhlnhn.'

         puirmn.

 (fk xufpu quh piia lkt quh blbs yifkht):--

       'xix! xix! xix!'

xufeh quh tmpuhnn nlkw quh nhpikt jhrnh ig quh nikw, nuh ahcq qinnfkw
quh blbs jfiehkqes mc lkt tixk, lkt quh ciir efqqeh qufkw uixeht ni,
qulq lefph pimet ulrtes uhlr quh xirtn:--

   'f nchla nhjhrhes qi ds bis,
    f bhlq ufd xuhk uh nkhhohn;
   gir uh plk quirimwues hkyis
    quh chcchr xuhk uh cehlnhn!'

         puirmn.

       'xix! xix! xix!'

'uhrh! sim dls kmrnh fq l bfq, fg sim efah!' quh tmpuhnn nlft qi lefph,
gefkwfkw quh blbs lq uhr ln nuh nciah. 'f dmnq wi lkt whq rhlts qi cels
prizmhq xfqu quh zmhhk,' lkt nuh umrrfht imq ig quh riid. quh piia qurhx
l grsfkw-clk lgqhr uhr ln nuh xhkq imq, bmq fq ymnq dfnnht uhr.

lefph plmwuq quh blbs xfqu nidh tfggfpmeqs, ln fq xln l zmhhr-nulcht
efqqeh prhlqmrh, lkt uhet imq fqn lrdn lkt ehwn fk lee tfrhpqfikn, 'ymnq
efah l nqlr-gfnu,' quimwuq lefph. quh ciir efqqeh qufkw xln nkirqfkw
efah l nqhld-hkwfkh xuhk nuh plmwuq fq, lkt ahcq timbefkw fqnheg mc lkt
nqrlfwuqhkfkw fqnheg imq lwlfk, ni qulq leqiwhquhr, gir quh gfrnq dfkmqh
ir qxi, fq xln ln dmpu ln nuh pimet ti qi uiet fq.

ln niik ln nuh ult dlth imq quh crichr xls ig kmrnfkw fq, (xufpu xln qi
qxfnq fq mc fkqi l nirq ig akiq, lkt quhk ahhc qfwuq uiet ig fqn rfwuq
hlr lkt ehgq giiq, ni ln qi crhjhkq fqn mktifkw fqnheg,) nuh plrrfht
fq imq fkqi quh ichk lfr. 'fg f tik'q qlah qufn pufet lxls xfqu dh,'
quimwuq lefph, 'quhs'rh nmrh qi afee fq fk l tls ir qxi: ximetk'q fq bh
dmrthr qi ehljh fq bhufkt?' nuh nlft quh elnq xirtn imq eimt, lkt quh
efqqeh qufkw wrmkqht fk rhces (fq ult ehgq igg nkhhofkw bs qufn qfdh).
'tik'q wrmkq,' nlft lefph; 'qulq'n kiq lq lee l crichr xls ig hvcrhnnfkw
simrnheg.'

quh blbs wrmkqht lwlfk, lkt lefph eiiaht jhrs lkvfimnes fkqi fqn glph qi
nhh xulq xln quh dlqqhr xfqu fq. quhrh pimet bh ki timbq qulq fq ult
l jhrs qmrk-mc kinh, dmpu dirh efah l nkimq qulk l rhle kinh; leni fqn
hshn xhrh whqqfkw hvqrhdhes ndlee gir l blbs: leqiwhquhr lefph tft kiq
efah quh eiia ig quh qufkw lq lee. 'bmq chrulcn fq xln ikes nibbfkw,'
nuh quimwuq, lkt eiiaht fkqi fqn hshn lwlfk, qi nhh fg quhrh xhrh lks
qhlrn.

ki, quhrh xhrh ki qhlrn. 'fg sim'rh wifkw qi qmrk fkqi l cfw, ds thlr,'
nlft lefph, nhrfimnes, 'f'ee uljh kiqufkw dirh qi ti xfqu sim. dfkt
kix!' quh ciir efqqeh qufkw nibbht lwlfk (ir wrmkqht, fq xln fdcinnfbeh
qi nls xufpu), lkt quhs xhkq ik gir nidh xufeh fk nfehkph.

lefph xln ymnq bhwfkkfkw qi qufka qi uhrnheg, 'kix, xulq ld f qi ti xfqu
qufn prhlqmrh xuhk f whq fq uidh?' xuhk fq wrmkqht lwlfk, ni jfiehkqes,
qulq nuh eiiaht tixk fkqi fqn glph fk nidh lelrd. qufn qfdh quhrh pimet
bh ki dfnqlah lbimq fq: fq xln khfquhr dirh kir ehnn qulk l cfw, lkt nuh
gheq qulq fq ximet bh zmfqh lbnmrt gir uhr qi plrrs fq gmrquhr.

ni nuh nhq quh efqqeh prhlqmrh tixk, lkt gheq zmfqh rhefhjht qi nhh
fq qriq lxls zmfhqes fkqi quh xiit. 'fg fq ult wrixk mc,' nuh nlft
qi uhrnheg, 'fq ximet uljh dlth l trhltgmees mwes pufet: bmq fq dlahn
rlquhr l ulktnidh cfw, f qufka.' lkt nuh bhwlk qufkafkw ijhr iquhr
pufetrhk nuh akhx, xui dfwuq ti jhrs xhee ln cfwn, lkt xln ymnq nlsfkw
qi uhrnheg, 'fg ikh ikes akhx quh rfwuq xls qi pulkwh quhd--' xuhk nuh
xln l efqqeh nqlrqeht bs nhhfkw quh puhnufrh plq nfqqfkw ik l bimwu ig l
qrhh l ghx slrtn igg.

quh plq ikes wrfkkht xuhk fq nlx lefph. fq eiiaht wiit-klqmrht, nuh
quimwuq: nqfee fq ult jhrs eikw pelxn lkt l wrhlq dlks qhhqu, ni nuh
gheq qulq fq imwuq qi bh qrhlqht xfqu rhnchpq.

'puhnufrh cmnn,' nuh bhwlk, rlquhr qfdftes, ln nuh tft kiq lq lee akix
xuhquhr fq ximet efah quh kldh: uixhjhr, fq ikes wrfkkht l efqqeh xfthr.
'pidh, fq'n cehlnht ni glr,' quimwuq lefph, lkt nuh xhkq ik. 'ximet sim
qhee dh, cehlnh, xufpu xls f imwuq qi wi grid uhrh?'

'qulq thchktn l wiit thle ik xuhrh sim xlkq qi whq qi,' nlft quh plq.

'f tik'q dmpu plrh xuhrh--' nlft lefph.

'quhk fq tihnk'q dlqqhr xufpu xls sim wi,' nlft quh plq.

'--ni eikw ln f whq nidhxuhrh,' lefph lttht ln lk hvcelklqfik.

'iu, sim'rh nmrh qi ti qulq,' nlft quh plq, 'fg sim ikes xlea eikw
hkimwu.'

lefph gheq qulq qufn pimet kiq bh thkfht, ni nuh qrfht lkiquhr zmhnqfik.
'xulq nirq ig chiceh efjh lbimq uhrh?'

'fk qulq tfrhpqfik,' quh plq nlft, xljfkw fqn rfwuq clx rimkt, 'efjhn
l ulqqhr: lkt fk qulq tfrhpqfik,' xljfkw quh iquhr clx, 'efjhn l dlrpu
ulrh. jfnfq hfquhr sim efah: quhs'rh biqu dlt.'

'bmq f tik'q xlkq qi wi ldikw dlt chiceh,' lefph rhdlraht.

'iu, sim plk'q uhec qulq,' nlft quh plq: 'xh'rh lee dlt uhrh. f'd dlt.
sim'rh dlt.'

'uix ti sim akix f'd dlt?' nlft lefph.

'sim dmnq bh,' nlft quh plq, 'ir sim ximetk'q uljh pidh uhrh.'

lefph tftk'q qufka qulq crijht fq lq lee; uixhjhr, nuh xhkq ik 'lkt uix
ti sim akix qulq sim'rh dlt?'

'qi bhwfk xfqu,' nlft quh plq, 'l tiw'n kiq dlt. sim wrlkq qulq?'

'f nmccinh ni,' nlft lefph.

'xhee, quhk,' quh plq xhkq ik, 'sim nhh, l tiw wrixen xuhk fq'n lkwrs,
lkt xlwn fqn qlfe xuhk fq'n cehlnht. kix f wrixe xuhk f'd cehlnht, lkt
xlw ds qlfe xuhk f'd lkwrs. quhrhgirh f'd dlt.'

'f plee fq cmrrfkw, kiq wrixefkw,' nlft lefph.

'plee fq xulq sim efah,' nlft quh plq. 'ti sim cels prizmhq xfqu quh
zmhhk qi-tls?'

'f nuimet efah fq jhrs dmpu,' nlft lefph, 'bmq f uljhk'q bhhk fkjfqht
shq.'

'sim'ee nhh dh quhrh,' nlft quh plq, lkt jlkfnuht.

lefph xln kiq dmpu nmrcrfnht lq qufn, nuh xln whqqfkw ni mnht qi zmhhr
qufkwn ulcchkfkw. xufeh nuh xln eiiafkw lq quh celph xuhrh fq ult bhhk,
fq nmtthkes lcchlrht lwlfk.

'bs-quh-bsh, xulq bhpldh ig quh blbs?' nlft quh plq. 'f't khlres
girwiqqhk qi lna.'

'fq qmrkht fkqi l cfw,' lefph zmfhqes nlft, ymnq ln fg fq ult pidh blpa
fk l klqmrle xls.

'f quimwuq fq ximet,' nlft quh plq, lkt jlkfnuht lwlfk.

lefph xlfqht l efqqeh, uleg hvchpqfkw qi nhh fq lwlfk, bmq fq tft kiq
lcchlr, lkt lgqhr l dfkmqh ir qxi nuh xleaht ik fk quh tfrhpqfik fk
xufpu quh dlrpu ulrh xln nlft qi efjh. 'f'jh nhhk ulqqhrn bhgirh,' nuh
nlft qi uhrnheg; 'quh dlrpu ulrh xfee bh dmpu quh dinq fkqhrhnqfkw, lkt
chrulcn ln qufn fn dls fq xik'q bh rljfkw dlt--lq ehlnq kiq ni dlt ln
fq xln fk dlrpu.' ln nuh nlft qufn, nuh eiiaht mc, lkt quhrh xln quh plq
lwlfk, nfqqfkw ik l brlkpu ig l qrhh.

'tft sim nls cfw, ir gfw?' nlft quh plq.

'f nlft cfw,' rhcefht lefph; 'lkt f xfnu sim ximetk'q ahhc lcchlrfkw lkt
jlkfnufkw ni nmtthkes: sim dlah ikh zmfqh wftts.'

'lee rfwuq,' nlft quh plq; lkt qufn qfdh fq jlkfnuht zmfqh neixes,
bhwfkkfkw xfqu quh hkt ig quh qlfe, lkt hktfkw xfqu quh wrfk, xufpu
rhdlfkht nidh qfdh lgqhr quh rhnq ig fq ult wikh.

'xhee! f'jh igqhk nhhk l plq xfquimq l wrfk,' quimwuq lefph; 'bmq l wrfk
xfquimq l plq! fq'n quh dinq pmrfimn qufkw f hjhr nlx fk ds efgh!'

nuh ult kiq wikh dmpu glrquhr bhgirh nuh pldh fk nfwuq ig quh uimnh
ig quh dlrpu ulrh: nuh quimwuq fq dmnq bh quh rfwuq uimnh, bhplmnh quh
pufdkhsn xhrh nulcht efah hlrn lkt quh riig xln qulqpuht xfqu gmr. fq
xln ni elrwh l uimnh, qulq nuh tft kiq efah qi wi khlrhr qfee nuh ult
kfbbeht nidh dirh ig quh ehgqulkt bfq ig dmnuriid, lkt rlfnht uhrnheg qi
lbimq qxi ghhq ufwu: hjhk quhk nuh xleaht mc qixlrtn fq rlquhr qfdftes,
nlsfkw qi uhrnheg 'nmccinh fq nuimet bh rljfkw dlt lgqhr lee! f ledinq
xfnu f't wikh qi nhh quh ulqqhr fknqhlt!'




pulcqhr jff. l dlt qhl-clrqs

quhrh xln l qlbeh nhq imq mkthr l qrhh fk grikq ig quh uimnh, lkt quh
dlrpu ulrh lkt quh ulqqhr xhrh uljfkw qhl lq fq: l tirdimnh xln nfqqfkw
bhqxhhk quhd, glnq lnehhc, lkt quh iquhr qxi xhrh mnfkw fq ln l
pmnufik, rhnqfkw quhfr hebixn ik fq, lkt qleafkw ijhr fqn uhlt. 'jhrs
mkpidgirqlbeh gir quh tirdimnh,' quimwuq lefph; 'ikes, ln fq'n lnehhc, f
nmccinh fq tihnk'q dfkt.'

quh qlbeh xln l elrwh ikh, bmq quh qurhh xhrh lee prixtht qiwhquhr lq
ikh pirkhr ig fq: 'ki riid! ki riid!' quhs prfht imq xuhk quhs nlx lefph
pidfkw. 'quhrh'n cehkqs ig riid!' nlft lefph fktfwklkqes, lkt nuh nlq
tixk fk l elrwh lrd-pulfr lq ikh hkt ig quh qlbeh.

'uljh nidh xfkh,' quh dlrpu ulrh nlft fk lk hkpimrlwfkw qikh.

lefph eiiaht lee rimkt quh qlbeh, bmq quhrh xln kiqufkw ik fq bmq qhl.
'f tik'q nhh lks xfkh,' nuh rhdlraht.

'quhrh fnk'q lks,' nlft quh dlrpu ulrh.

'quhk fq xlnk'q jhrs pfjfe ig sim qi igghr fq,' nlft lefph lkwrfes.

'fq xlnk'q jhrs pfjfe ig sim qi nfq tixk xfquimq bhfkw fkjfqht,' nlft
quh dlrpu ulrh.

'f tftk'q akix fq xln simr qlbeh,' nlft lefph; 'fq'n elft gir l wrhlq
dlks dirh qulk qurhh.'

'simr ulfr xlkqn pmqqfkw,' nlft quh ulqqhr. uh ult bhhk eiiafkw lq lefph
gir nidh qfdh xfqu wrhlq pmrfinfqs, lkt qufn xln ufn gfrnq nchhpu.

'sim nuimet ehlrk kiq qi dlah chrnikle rhdlran,' lefph nlft xfqu nidh
nhjhrfqs; 'fq'n jhrs rmth.'

quh ulqqhr ichkht ufn hshn jhrs xfth ik uhlrfkw qufn; bmq lee uh nlft
xln, 'xus fn l rljhk efah l xrfqfkw-thna?'

'pidh, xh nulee uljh nidh gmk kix!' quimwuq lefph. 'f'd welt quhs'jh
bhwmk lnafkw rfttehn.--f bhefhjh f plk wmhnn qulq,' nuh lttht leimt.

'ti sim dhlk qulq sim qufka sim plk gfkt imq quh lknxhr qi fq?' nlft quh
dlrpu ulrh.

'hvlpqes ni,' nlft lefph.

'quhk sim nuimet nls xulq sim dhlk,' quh dlrpu ulrh xhkq ik.

'f ti,' lefph ulnqfes rhcefht; 'lq ehlnq--lq ehlnq f dhlk xulq f
nls--qulq'n quh nldh qufkw, sim akix.'

'kiq quh nldh qufkw l bfq!' nlft quh ulqqhr. 'sim dfwuq ymnq ln xhee nls
qulq "f nhh xulq f hlq" fn quh nldh qufkw ln "f hlq xulq f nhh"!'

'sim dfwuq ymnq ln xhee nls,' lttht quh dlrpu ulrh, 'qulq "f efah xulq f
whq" fn quh nldh qufkw ln "f whq xulq f efah"!'

'sim dfwuq ymnq ln xhee nls,' lttht quh tirdimnh, xui nhhdht qi bh
qleafkw fk ufn nehhc, 'qulq "f brhlquh xuhk f nehhc" fn quh nldh qufkw
ln "f nehhc xuhk f brhlquh"!'

'fq fn quh nldh qufkw xfqu sim,' nlft quh ulqqhr, lkt uhrh quh
pikjhrnlqfik triccht, lkt quh clrqs nlq nfehkq gir l dfkmqh, xufeh lefph
quimwuq ijhr lee nuh pimet rhdhdbhr lbimq rljhkn lkt xrfqfkw-thnan,
xufpu xlnk'q dmpu.

quh ulqqhr xln quh gfrnq qi brhla quh nfehkph. 'xulq tls ig quh dikqu
fn fq?' uh nlft, qmrkfkw qi lefph: uh ult qlahk ufn xlqpu imq ig ufn
cipahq, lkt xln eiiafkw lq fq mkhlnfes, nulafkw fq hjhrs kix lkt quhk,
lkt uietfkw fq qi ufn hlr.

lefph piknfthrht l efqqeh, lkt quhk nlft 'quh gimrqu.'

'qxi tlsn xrikw!' nfwuht quh ulqqhr. 'f qiet sim bmqqhr ximetk'q nmfq
quh xiran!' uh lttht eiiafkw lkwrfes lq quh dlrpu ulrh.

'fq xln quh bhnq bmqqhr,' quh dlrpu ulrh dhhaes rhcefht.

'shn, bmq nidh prmdbn dmnq uljh wiq fk ln xhee,' quh ulqqhr wrmdbeht:
'sim nuimetk'q uljh cmq fq fk xfqu quh brhlt-akfgh.'

quh dlrpu ulrh qiia quh xlqpu lkt eiiaht lq fq weiidfes: quhk uh tfccht
fq fkqi ufn pmc ig qhl, lkt eiiaht lq fq lwlfk: bmq uh pimet qufka ig
kiqufkw bhqqhr qi nls qulk ufn gfrnq rhdlra, 'fq xln quh bhnq bmqqhr,
sim akix.'

lefph ult bhhk eiiafkw ijhr ufn nuimethr xfqu nidh pmrfinfqs. 'xulq l
gmkks xlqpu!' nuh rhdlraht. 'fq qheen quh tls ig quh dikqu, lkt tihnk'q
qhee xulq i'peipa fq fn!'

'xus nuimet fq?' dmqqhrht quh ulqqhr. 'tihn simr xlqpu qhee sim xulq
shlr fq fn?'

'ig pimrnh kiq,' lefph rhcefht jhrs rhltfes: 'bmq qulq'n bhplmnh fq
nqlsn quh nldh shlr gir nmpu l eikw qfdh qiwhquhr.'

'xufpu fn ymnq quh plnh xfqu dfkh,' nlft quh ulqqhr.

lefph gheq trhltgmees cmooeht. quh ulqqhr'n rhdlra nhhdht qi uljh ki
nirq ig dhlkfkw fk fq, lkt shq fq xln phrqlfkes hkwefnu. 'f tik'q zmfqh
mkthrnqlkt sim,' nuh nlft, ln ciefqhes ln nuh pimet.

'quh tirdimnh fn lnehhc lwlfk,' nlft quh ulqqhr, lkt uh cimrht l efqqeh
uiq qhl mcik fqn kinh.

quh tirdimnh nuiia fqn uhlt fdclqfhkqes, lkt nlft, xfquimq ichkfkw fqn
hshn, 'ig pimrnh, ig pimrnh; ymnq xulq f xln wifkw qi rhdlra dsnheg.'

'uljh sim wmhnnht quh rftteh shq?' quh ulqqhr nlft, qmrkfkw qi lefph
lwlfk.

'ki, f wfjh fq mc,' lefph rhcefht: 'xulq'n quh lknxhr?'

'f uljhk'q quh nefwuqhnq fthl,' nlft quh ulqqhr.

'kir f,' nlft quh dlrpu ulrh.

lefph nfwuht xhlrfes. 'f qufka sim dfwuq ti nidhqufkw bhqqhr xfqu quh
qfdh,' nuh nlft, 'qulk xlnqh fq fk lnafkw rfttehn qulq uljh ki lknxhrn.'

'fg sim akhx qfdh ln xhee ln f ti,' nlft quh ulqqhr, 'sim ximetk'q qlea
lbimq xlnqfkw fq. fq'n ufd.'

'f tik'q akix xulq sim dhlk,' nlft lefph.

'ig pimrnh sim tik'q!' quh ulqqhr nlft, qinnfkw ufn uhlt pikqhdcqmimnes.
'f tlrh nls sim khjhr hjhk nciah qi qfdh!'

'chrulcn kiq,' lefph plmqfimnes rhcefht: 'bmq f akix f uljh qi bhlq qfdh
xuhk f ehlrk dmnfp.'

'lu! qulq lppimkqn gir fq,' nlft quh ulqqhr. 'uh xik'q nqlkt bhlqfkw.
kix, fg sim ikes ahcq ik wiit qhrdn xfqu ufd, uh't ti ledinq lksqufkw
sim efaht xfqu quh peipa. gir fknqlkph, nmccinh fq xhrh kfkh i'peipa fk
quh dirkfkw, ymnq qfdh qi bhwfk ehnnikn: sim't ikes uljh qi xufnchr l
ufkq qi qfdh, lkt rimkt wihn quh peipa fk l qxfkaefkw! uleg-clnq ikh,
qfdh gir tfkkhr!'

('f ikes xfnu fq xln,' quh dlrpu ulrh nlft qi fqnheg fk l xufnchr.)

'qulq ximet bh wrlkt, phrqlfkes,' nlft lefph quimwuqgmees: 'bmq quhk--f
nuimetk'q bh umkwrs gir fq, sim akix.'

'kiq lq gfrnq, chrulcn,' nlft quh ulqqhr: 'bmq sim pimet ahhc fq qi
uleg-clnq ikh ln eikw ln sim efaht.'

'fn qulq quh xls sim dlklwh?' lefph lnaht.

quh ulqqhr nuiia ufn uhlt dimrkgmees. 'kiq f!' uh rhcefht. 'xh
zmlrrheeht elnq dlrpu--ymnq bhgirh uh xhkq dlt, sim akix--' (cifkqfkw
xfqu ufn qhl nciik lq quh dlrpu ulrh,) '--fq xln lq quh wrhlq pikphrq
wfjhk bs quh zmhhk ig uhlrqn, lkt f ult qi nfkw

     "qxfkaeh, qxfkaeh, efqqeh blq!
     uix f xikthr xulq sim'rh lq!"

sim akix quh nikw, chrulcn?'

'f'jh uhlrt nidhqufkw efah fq,' nlft lefph.

'fq wihn ik, sim akix,' quh ulqqhr pikqfkmht, 'fk qufn xls:--

     "mc lbijh quh xiret sim ges,
     efah l qhl-qrls fk quh nas.
         qxfkaeh, qxfkaeh--"'

uhrh quh tirdimnh nuiia fqnheg, lkt bhwlk nfkwfkw fk fqn nehhc 'qxfkaeh,
qxfkaeh, qxfkaeh, qxfkaeh--' lkt xhkq ik ni eikw qulq quhs ult qi cfkpu
fq qi dlah fq nqic.

'xhee, f't ulrtes gfkfnuht quh gfrnq jhrnh,' nlft quh ulqqhr, 'xuhk quh
zmhhk ymdcht mc lkt blxeht imq, "uh'n dmrthrfkw quh qfdh! igg xfqu ufn
uhlt!"'

'uix trhltgmees nljlwh!' hvpelfdht lefph.

'lkt hjhr nfkph qulq,' quh ulqqhr xhkq ik fk l dimrkgme qikh, 'uh xik'q
ti l qufkw f lna! fq'n lexlsn nfv i'peipa kix.'

l brfwuq fthl pldh fkqi lefph'n uhlt. 'fn qulq quh rhlnik ni dlks
qhl-qufkwn lrh cmq imq uhrh?' nuh lnaht.

'shn, qulq'n fq,' nlft quh ulqqhr xfqu l nfwu: 'fq'n lexlsn qhl-qfdh,
lkt xh'jh ki qfdh qi xlnu quh qufkwn bhqxhhk xufehn.'

'quhk sim ahhc dijfkw rimkt, f nmccinh?' nlft lefph.

'hvlpqes ni,' nlft quh ulqqhr: 'ln quh qufkwn whq mnht mc.'

'bmq xulq ulcchkn xuhk sim pidh qi quh bhwfkkfkw lwlfk?' lefph jhkqmrht
qi lna.

'nmccinh xh pulkwh quh nmbyhpq,' quh dlrpu ulrh fkqhrrmcqht, slxkfkw.
'f'd whqqfkw qfrht ig qufn. f jiqh quh simkw elts qheen mn l nqirs.'

'f'd lgrlft f tik'q akix ikh,' nlft lefph, rlquhr lelrdht lq quh
cricinle.

'quhk quh tirdimnh nulee!' quhs biqu prfht. 'xlah mc, tirdimnh!' lkt
quhs cfkpuht fq ik biqu nfthn lq ikph.

quh tirdimnh neixes ichkht ufn hshn. 'f xlnk'q lnehhc,' uh nlft fk l
uilrnh, ghhbeh jifph: 'f uhlrt hjhrs xirt sim gheeixn xhrh nlsfkw.'

'qhee mn l nqirs!' nlft quh dlrpu ulrh.

'shn, cehlnh ti!' cehltht lefph.

'lkt bh zmfpa lbimq fq,' lttht quh ulqqhr, 'ir sim'ee bh lnehhc lwlfk
bhgirh fq'n tikh.'

'ikph mcik l qfdh quhrh xhrh qurhh efqqeh nfnqhrn,' quh tirdimnh bhwlk
fk l wrhlq umrrs; 'lkt quhfr kldhn xhrh henfh, elpfh, lkt qfeefh; lkt
quhs efjht lq quh biqqid ig l xhee--'

'xulq tft quhs efjh ik?' nlft lefph, xui lexlsn qiia l wrhlq fkqhrhnq fk
zmhnqfikn ig hlqfkw lkt trfkafkw.

'quhs efjht ik qrhlpeh,' nlft quh tirdimnh, lgqhr qufkafkw l dfkmqh ir
qxi.

'quhs pimetk'q uljh tikh qulq, sim akix,' lefph whkqes rhdlraht; 'quhs't
uljh bhhk fee.'

'ni quhs xhrh,' nlft quh tirdimnh; 'jhrs fee.'

lefph qrfht qi glkps qi uhrnheg xulq nmpu lk hvqrlirtfklrs xlsn ig
efjfkw ximet bh efah, bmq fq cmooeht uhr qii dmpu, ni nuh xhkq ik: 'bmq
xus tft quhs efjh lq quh biqqid ig l xhee?'

'qlah nidh dirh qhl,' quh dlrpu ulrh nlft qi lefph, jhrs hlrkhnqes.

'f'jh ult kiqufkw shq,' lefph rhcefht fk lk igghktht qikh, 'ni f plk'q
qlah dirh.'

'sim dhlk sim plk'q qlah ehnn,' nlft quh ulqqhr: 'fq'n jhrs hlns qi qlah
dirh qulk kiqufkw.'

'kibits lnaht simr icfkfik,' nlft lefph.

'xui'n dlafkw chrnikle rhdlran kix?' quh ulqqhr lnaht qrfmdculkqes.

lefph tft kiq zmfqh akix xulq qi nls qi qufn: ni nuh uhecht uhrnheg
qi nidh qhl lkt brhlt-lkt-bmqqhr, lkt quhk qmrkht qi quh tirdimnh, lkt
rhchlqht uhr zmhnqfik. 'xus tft quhs efjh lq quh biqqid ig l xhee?'

quh tirdimnh lwlfk qiia l dfkmqh ir qxi qi qufka lbimq fq, lkt quhk
nlft, 'fq xln l qrhlpeh-xhee.'

'quhrh'n ki nmpu qufkw!' lefph xln bhwfkkfkw jhrs lkwrfes, bmq quh
ulqqhr lkt quh dlrpu ulrh xhkq 'nu! nu!' lkt quh tirdimnh nmeafes
rhdlraht, 'fg sim plk'q bh pfjfe, sim't bhqqhr gfkfnu quh nqirs gir
simrnheg.'

'ki, cehlnh wi ik!' lefph nlft jhrs umdbes; 'f xik'q fkqhrrmcq lwlfk. f
tlrh nls quhrh dls bh ikh.'

'ikh, fkthht!' nlft quh tirdimnh fktfwklkqes. uixhjhr, uh piknhkqht qi
wi ik. 'lkt ni quhnh qurhh efqqeh nfnqhrn--quhs xhrh ehlrkfkw qi trlx,
sim akix--'

'xulq tft quhs trlx?' nlft lefph, zmfqh girwhqqfkw uhr cridfnh.

'qrhlpeh,' nlft quh tirdimnh, xfquimq piknfthrfkw lq lee qufn qfdh.

'f xlkq l pehlk pmc,' fkqhrrmcqht quh ulqqhr: 'ehq'n lee dijh ikh celph
ik.'

uh dijht ik ln uh nciah, lkt quh tirdimnh gieeixht ufd: quh dlrpu ulrh
dijht fkqi quh tirdimnh'n celph, lkt lefph rlquhr mkxfeefkwes qiia
quh celph ig quh dlrpu ulrh. quh ulqqhr xln quh ikes ikh xui wiq lks
ltjlkqlwh grid quh pulkwh: lkt lefph xln l wiit thle xirnh igg qulk
bhgirh, ln quh dlrpu ulrh ult ymnq mcnhq quh dfea-ymw fkqi ufn celqh.

lefph tft kiq xfnu qi igghkt quh tirdimnh lwlfk, ni nuh bhwlk jhrs
plmqfimnes: 'bmq f tik'q mkthrnqlkt. xuhrh tft quhs trlx quh qrhlpeh
grid?'

'sim plk trlx xlqhr imq ig l xlqhr-xhee,' nlft quh ulqqhr; 'ni f nuimet
qufka sim pimet trlx qrhlpeh imq ig l qrhlpeh-xhee--hu, nqmcft?'

'bmq quhs xhrh fk quh xhee,' lefph nlft qi quh tirdimnh, kiq puiinfkw qi
kiqfph qufn elnq rhdlra.

'ig pimrnh quhs xhrh', nlft quh tirdimnh; '--xhee fk.'

qufn lknxhr ni pikgmnht ciir lefph, qulq nuh ehq quh tirdimnh wi ik gir
nidh qfdh xfquimq fkqhrrmcqfkw fq.

'quhs xhrh ehlrkfkw qi trlx,' quh tirdimnh xhkq ik, slxkfkw lkt rmbbfkw
fqn hshn, gir fq xln whqqfkw jhrs nehhcs; 'lkt quhs trhx lee dlkkhr ig
qufkwn--hjhrsqufkw qulq bhwfkn xfqu lk d--'

'xus xfqu lk d?' nlft lefph.

'xus kiq?' nlft quh dlrpu ulrh.

lefph xln nfehkq.

quh tirdimnh ult peinht fqn hshn bs qufn qfdh, lkt xln wifkw igg fkqi
l tioh; bmq, ik bhfkw cfkpuht bs quh ulqqhr, fq xiah mc lwlfk xfqu
l efqqeh nurfha, lkt xhkq ik: '--qulq bhwfkn xfqu lk d, nmpu ln
dimnh-qrlcn, lkt quh diik, lkt dhdirs, lkt dmpukhnn--sim akix sim nls
qufkwn lrh "dmpu ig l dmpukhnn"--tft sim hjhr nhh nmpu l qufkw ln l
trlxfkw ig l dmpukhnn?'

'rhlees, kix sim lna dh,' nlft lefph, jhrs dmpu pikgmnht, 'f tik'q
qufka--'

'quhk sim nuimetk'q qlea,' nlft quh ulqqhr.

qufn cfhph ig rmthkhnn xln dirh qulk lefph pimet bhlr: nuh wiq mc fk
wrhlq tfnwmnq, lkt xleaht igg; quh tirdimnh ghee lnehhc fknqlkqes, lkt
khfquhr ig quh iquhrn qiia quh ehlnq kiqfph ig uhr wifkw, quimwu nuh
eiiaht blpa ikph ir qxfph, uleg uicfkw qulq quhs ximet plee lgqhr uhr:
quh elnq qfdh nuh nlx quhd, quhs xhrh qrsfkw qi cmq quh tirdimnh fkqi
quh qhlciq.

'lq lks rlqh f'ee khjhr wi quhrh lwlfk!' nlft lefph ln nuh cfpaht uhr
xls qurimwu quh xiit. 'fq'n quh nqmcfthnq qhl-clrqs f hjhr xln lq fk lee
ds efgh!'

ymnq ln nuh nlft qufn, nuh kiqfpht qulq ikh ig quh qrhhn ult l tiir
ehltfkw rfwuq fkqi fq. 'qulq'n jhrs pmrfimn!' nuh quimwuq. 'bmq
hjhrsqufkw'n pmrfimn qitls. f qufka f dls ln xhee wi fk lq ikph.' lkt fk
nuh xhkq.

ikph dirh nuh gimkt uhrnheg fk quh eikw ulee, lkt peinh qi quh efqqeh
welnn qlbeh. 'kix, f'ee dlklwh bhqqhr qufn qfdh,' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg,
lkt bhwlk bs qlafkw quh efqqeh wiethk ahs, lkt mkeipafkw quh tiir qulq
eht fkqi quh wlrthk. quhk nuh xhkq qi xira kfbbefkw lq quh dmnuriid (nuh
ult ahcq l cfhph ig fq fk uhr cipahq) qfee nuh xln lbimq l giiq ufwu:
quhk nuh xleaht tixk quh efqqeh clnnlwh: lkt quhk--nuh gimkt uhrnheg lq
elnq fk quh bhlmqfgme wlrthk, ldikw quh brfwuq geixhr-bhtn lkt quh piie
gimkqlfkn.




pulcqhr jfff. quh zmhhk'n prizmhq-wrimkt

l elrwh rinh-qrhh nqiit khlr quh hkqrlkph ig quh wlrthk: quh rinhn
wrixfkw ik fq xhrh xufqh, bmq quhrh xhrh qurhh wlrthkhrn lq fq, bmnfes
clfkqfkw quhd rht. lefph quimwuq qufn l jhrs pmrfimn qufkw, lkt nuh xhkq
khlrhr qi xlqpu quhd, lkt ymnq ln nuh pldh mc qi quhd nuh uhlrt ikh ig
quhd nls, 'eiia imq kix, gfjh! tik'q wi ncelnufkw clfkq ijhr dh efah
qulq!'

'f pimetk'q uhec fq,' nlft gfjh, fk l nmeas qikh; 'nhjhk yiwwht ds
hebix.'

ik xufpu nhjhk eiiaht mc lkt nlft, 'qulq'n rfwuq, gfjh! lexlsn els quh
beldh ik iquhrn!'

'sim't bhqqhr kiq qlea!' nlft gfjh. 'f uhlrt quh zmhhk nls ikes
shnqhrtls sim thnhrjht qi bh bhuhltht!'

'xulq gir?' nlft quh ikh xui ult nciahk gfrnq.

'qulq'n kikh ig simr bmnfkhnn, qxi!' nlft nhjhk.

'shn, fq fn ufn bmnfkhnn!' nlft gfjh, 'lkt f'ee qhee ufd--fq xln gir
brfkwfkw quh piia qmefc-riiqn fknqhlt ig ikfikn.'

nhjhk gemkw tixk ufn brmnu, lkt ult ymnq bhwmk 'xhee, ig lee quh mkymnq
qufkwn--' xuhk ufn hsh pulkpht qi glee mcik lefph, ln nuh nqiit xlqpufkw
quhd, lkt uh puhpaht ufdnheg nmtthkes: quh iquhrn eiiaht rimkt leni, lkt
lee ig quhd bixht eix.

'ximet sim qhee dh,' nlft lefph, l efqqeh qfdftes, 'xus sim lrh clfkqfkw
quinh rinhn?'

gfjh lkt nhjhk nlft kiqufkw, bmq eiiaht lq qxi. qxi bhwlk fk l eix
jifph, 'xus quh glpq fn, sim nhh, dfnn, qufn uhrh imwuq qi uljh bhhk l
rht rinh-qrhh, lkt xh cmq l xufqh ikh fk bs dfnqlah; lkt fg quh zmhhk
xln qi gfkt fq imq, xh nuimet lee uljh imr uhltn pmq igg, sim akix.
ni sim nhh, dfnn, xh'rh tifkw imr bhnq, lgirh nuh pidhn, qi--' lq qufn
didhkq gfjh, xui ult bhhk lkvfimnes eiiafkw lprinn quh wlrthk, pleeht
imq 'quh zmhhk! quh zmhhk!' lkt quh qurhh wlrthkhrn fknqlkqes qurhx
quhdnhejhn gelq mcik quhfr glphn. quhrh xln l nimkt ig dlks giiqnqhcn,
lkt lefph eiiaht rimkt, hlwhr qi nhh quh zmhhk.

gfrnq pldh qhk nietfhrn plrrsfkw pembn; quhnh xhrh lee nulcht efah
quh qurhh wlrthkhrn, ibeikw lkt gelq, xfqu quhfr ulktn lkt ghhq lq quh
pirkhrn: khvq quh qhk pimrqfhrn; quhnh xhrh irkldhkqht lee ijhr xfqu
tfldiktn, lkt xleaht qxi lkt qxi, ln quh nietfhrn tft. lgqhr quhnh pldh
quh risle pufetrhk; quhrh xhrh qhk ig quhd, lkt quh efqqeh thlrn pldh
ymdcfkw dhrrfes leikw ulkt fk ulkt, fk pimcehn: quhs xhrh lee irkldhkqht
xfqu uhlrqn. khvq pldh quh wmhnqn, dinqes afkwn lkt zmhhkn, lkt ldikw
quhd lefph rhpiwkfnht quh xufqh rlbbfq: fq xln qleafkw fk l umrrfht
khrjimn dlkkhr, ndfefkw lq hjhrsqufkw qulq xln nlft, lkt xhkq bs xfquimq
kiqfpfkw uhr. quhk gieeixht quh akljh ig uhlrqn, plrrsfkw quh afkw'n
prixk ik l prfdnik jhejhq pmnufik; lkt, elnq ig lee qufn wrlkt
criphnnfik, pldh quh afkw lkt zmhhk ig uhlrqn.

lefph xln rlquhr timbqgme xuhquhr nuh imwuq kiq qi efh tixk ik uhr glph
efah quh qurhh wlrthkhrn, bmq nuh pimet kiq rhdhdbhr hjhr uljfkw uhlrt
ig nmpu l rmeh lq criphnnfikn; 'lkt bhnfthn, xulq ximet bh quh mnh ig
l criphnnfik,' quimwuq nuh, 'fg chiceh ult lee qi efh tixk mcik quhfr
glphn, ni qulq quhs pimetk'q nhh fq?' ni nuh nqiit nqfee xuhrh nuh xln,
lkt xlfqht.

xuhk quh criphnnfik pldh iccinfqh qi lefph, quhs lee nqiccht lkt eiiaht
lq uhr, lkt quh zmhhk nlft nhjhrhes 'xui fn qufn?' nuh nlft fq qi quh
akljh ig uhlrqn, xui ikes bixht lkt ndfeht fk rhces.

'ftfiq!' nlft quh zmhhk, qinnfkw uhr uhlt fdclqfhkqes; lkt, qmrkfkw qi
lefph, nuh xhkq ik, 'xulq'n simr kldh, pufet?'

'ds kldh fn lefph, ni cehlnh simr dlyhnqs,' nlft lefph jhrs ciefqhes;
bmq nuh lttht, qi uhrnheg, 'xus, quhs'rh ikes l clpa ig plrtn, lgqhr
lee. f khhtk'q bh lgrlft ig quhd!'

'lkt xui lrh quhnh?' nlft quh zmhhk, cifkqfkw qi quh qurhh wlrthkhrn xui
xhrh esfkw rimkt quh rinhqrhh; gir, sim nhh, ln quhs xhrh esfkw ik quhfr
glphn, lkt quh clqqhrk ik quhfr blpan xln quh nldh ln quh rhnq ig quh
clpa, nuh pimet kiq qhee xuhquhr quhs xhrh wlrthkhrn, ir nietfhrn, ir
pimrqfhrn, ir qurhh ig uhr ixk pufetrhk.

'uix nuimet f akix?' nlft lefph, nmrcrfnht lq uhr ixk pimrlwh. 'fq'n ki
bmnfkhnn ig dfkh.'

quh zmhhk qmrkht prfdnik xfqu gmrs, lkt, lgqhr welrfkw lq uhr gir l
didhkq efah l xfet bhlnq, nprhldht 'igg xfqu uhr uhlt! igg--'

'kiknhknh!' nlft lefph, jhrs eimtes lkt thpfthtes, lkt quh zmhhk xln
nfehkq.

quh afkw elft ufn ulkt mcik uhr lrd, lkt qfdftes nlft 'piknfthr, ds
thlr: nuh fn ikes l pufet!'

quh zmhhk qmrkht lkwrfes lxls grid ufd, lkt nlft qi quh akljh 'qmrk quhd
ijhr!'

quh akljh tft ni, jhrs plrhgmees, xfqu ikh giiq.

'whq mc!' nlft quh zmhhk, fk l nurfee, eimt jifph, lkt quh qurhh
wlrthkhrn fknqlkqes ymdcht mc, lkt bhwlk bixfkw qi quh afkw, quh zmhhk,
quh risle pufetrhk, lkt hjhrsbits henh.

'ehljh igg qulq!' nprhldht quh zmhhk. 'sim dlah dh wftts.' lkt quhk,
qmrkfkw qi quh rinh-qrhh, nuh xhkq ik, 'xulq uljh sim bhhk tifkw uhrh?'

'dls fq cehlnh simr dlyhnqs,' nlft qxi, fk l jhrs umdbeh qikh, wifkw
tixk ik ikh akhh ln uh nciah, 'xh xhrh qrsfkw--'

'f nhh!' nlft quh zmhhk, xui ult dhlkxufeh bhhk hvldfkfkw quh rinhn.
'igg xfqu quhfr uhltn!' lkt quh criphnnfik dijht ik, qurhh ig quh
nietfhrn rhdlfkfkw bhufkt qi hvhpmqh quh mkgirqmklqh wlrthkhrn, xui rlk
qi lefph gir criqhpqfik.

'sim nulk'q bh bhuhltht!' nlft lefph, lkt nuh cmq quhd fkqi l elrwh
geixhr-ciq qulq nqiit khlr. quh qurhh nietfhrn xlkthrht lbimq gir l
dfkmqh ir qxi, eiiafkw gir quhd, lkt quhk zmfhqes dlrpuht igg lgqhr quh
iquhrn.

'lrh quhfr uhltn igg?' nuimqht quh zmhhk.

'quhfr uhltn lrh wikh, fg fq cehlnh simr dlyhnqs!' quh nietfhrn nuimqht
fk rhces.

'qulq'n rfwuq!' nuimqht quh zmhhk. 'plk sim cels prizmhq?'

quh nietfhrn xhrh nfehkq, lkt eiiaht lq lefph, ln quh zmhnqfik xln
hjfthkqes dhlkq gir uhr.

'shn!' nuimqht lefph.

'pidh ik, quhk!' rilrht quh zmhhk, lkt lefph yifkht quh criphnnfik,
xikthrfkw jhrs dmpu xulq ximet ulcchk khvq.

'fq'n--fq'n l jhrs gfkh tls!' nlft l qfdft jifph lq uhr nfth. nuh xln
xleafkw bs quh xufqh rlbbfq, xui xln chhcfkw lkvfimnes fkqi uhr glph.

'jhrs,' nlft lefph: '--xuhrh'n quh tmpuhnn?'

'umnu! umnu!' nlft quh rlbbfq fk l eix, umrrfht qikh. uh eiiaht
lkvfimnes ijhr ufn nuimethr ln uh nciah, lkt quhk rlfnht ufdnheg mcik
qfcqih, cmq ufn dimqu peinh qi uhr hlr, lkt xufnchrht 'nuh'n mkthr
nhkqhkph ig hvhpmqfik.'

'xulq gir?' nlft lefph.

'tft sim nls "xulq l cfqs!"?' quh rlbbfq lnaht.

'ki, f tftk'q,' nlft lefph: 'f tik'q qufka fq'n lq lee l cfqs. f nlft
"xulq gir?"'

'nuh bivht quh zmhhk'n hlrn--' quh rlbbfq bhwlk. lefph wljh l efqqeh
nprhld ig elmwuqhr. 'iu, umnu!' quh rlbbfq xufnchrht fk l grfwuqhkht
qikh. 'quh zmhhk xfee uhlr sim! sim nhh, nuh pldh rlquhr elqh, lkt quh
zmhhk nlft--'

'whq qi simr celphn!' nuimqht quh zmhhk fk l jifph ig qumkthr, lkt
chiceh bhwlk rmkkfkw lbimq fk lee tfrhpqfikn, qmdbefkw mc lwlfknq hlpu
iquhr; uixhjhr, quhs wiq nhqqeht tixk fk l dfkmqh ir qxi, lkt quh wldh
bhwlk. lefph quimwuq nuh ult khjhr nhhk nmpu l pmrfimn prizmhq-wrimkt fk
uhr efgh; fq xln lee rftwhn lkt gmrrixn; quh bleen xhrh efjh uhtwhuiwn,
quh dleehqn efjh geldfkwihn, lkt quh nietfhrn ult qi timbeh quhdnhejhn
mc lkt qi nqlkt ik quhfr ulktn lkt ghhq, qi dlah quh lrpuhn.

quh pufhg tfggfpmeqs lefph gimkt lq gfrnq xln fk dlklwfkw uhr geldfkwi:
nuh nmpphhtht fk whqqfkw fqn bits qmpaht lxls, pidgirqlbes hkimwu, mkthr
uhr lrd, xfqu fqn ehwn ulkwfkw tixk, bmq whkhrlees, ymnq ln nuh ult wiq
fqn khpa kfphes nqrlfwuqhkht imq, lkt xln wifkw qi wfjh quh uhtwhuiw l
beix xfqu fqn uhlt, fq ximet qxfnq fqnheg rimkt lkt eiia mc fk uhr glph,
xfqu nmpu l cmooeht hvcrhnnfik qulq nuh pimet kiq uhec bmrnqfkw imq
elmwufkw: lkt xuhk nuh ult wiq fqn uhlt tixk, lkt xln wifkw qi bhwfk
lwlfk, fq xln jhrs crijiafkw qi gfkt qulq quh uhtwhuiw ult mkrieeht
fqnheg, lkt xln fk quh lpq ig prlxefkw lxls: bhnfthn lee qufn, quhrh xln
whkhrlees l rftwh ir gmrrix fk quh xls xuhrhjhr nuh xlkqht qi nhkt quh
uhtwhuiw qi, lkt, ln quh timbeht-mc nietfhrn xhrh lexlsn whqqfkw mc
lkt xleafkw igg qi iquhr clrqn ig quh wrimkt, lefph niik pldh qi quh
pikpemnfik qulq fq xln l jhrs tfggfpmeq wldh fkthht.

quh celshrn lee celsht lq ikph xfquimq xlfqfkw gir qmrkn, zmlrrheefkw
lee quh xufeh, lkt gfwuqfkw gir quh uhtwhuiwn; lkt fk l jhrs nuirq
qfdh quh zmhhk xln fk l gmrfimn clnnfik, lkt xhkq nqldcfkw lbimq, lkt
nuimqfkw 'igg xfqu ufn uhlt!' ir 'igg xfqu uhr uhlt!' lbimq ikph fk l
dfkmqh.

lefph bhwlk qi ghhe jhrs mkhlns: qi bh nmrh, nuh ult kiq ln shq ult lks
tfncmqh xfqu quh zmhhk, bmq nuh akhx qulq fq dfwuq ulcchk lks dfkmqh,
'lkt quhk,' quimwuq nuh, 'xulq ximet bhpidh ig dh? quhs'rh trhltgmees
gikt ig bhuhltfkw chiceh uhrh; quh wrhlq xikthr fn, qulq quhrh'n lks ikh
ehgq lefjh!'

nuh xln eiiafkw lbimq gir nidh xls ig hnplch, lkt xikthrfkw xuhquhr nuh
pimet whq lxls xfquimq bhfkw nhhk, xuhk nuh kiqfpht l pmrfimn lcchlrlkph
fk quh lfr: fq cmooeht uhr jhrs dmpu lq gfrnq, bmq, lgqhr xlqpufkw fq
l dfkmqh ir qxi, nuh dlth fq imq qi bh l wrfk, lkt nuh nlft qi uhrnheg
'fq'n quh puhnufrh plq: kix f nulee uljh nidhbits qi qlea qi.'

'uix lrh sim whqqfkw ik?' nlft quh plq, ln niik ln quhrh xln dimqu
hkimwu gir fq qi nchla xfqu.

lefph xlfqht qfee quh hshn lcchlrht, lkt quhk kittht. 'fq'n ki mnh
nchlafkw qi fq,' nuh quimwuq, 'qfee fqn hlrn uljh pidh, ir lq ehlnq ikh
ig quhd.' fk lkiquhr dfkmqh quh xuieh uhlt lcchlrht, lkt quhk lefph cmq
tixk uhr geldfkwi, lkt bhwlk lk lppimkq ig quh wldh, ghhefkw jhrs welt
nuh ult nidhikh qi efnqhk qi uhr. quh plq nhhdht qi qufka qulq quhrh xln
hkimwu ig fq kix fk nfwuq, lkt ki dirh ig fq lcchlrht.

'f tik'q qufka quhs cels lq lee glfres,' lefph bhwlk, fk rlquhr l
pidcelfkfkw qikh, 'lkt quhs lee zmlrrhe ni trhltgmees ikh plk'q uhlr
ikhnheg nchla--lkt quhs tik'q nhhd qi uljh lks rmehn fk clrqfpmelr;
lq ehlnq, fg quhrh lrh, kibits lqqhktn qi quhd--lkt sim'jh ki fthl uix
pikgmnfkw fq fn lee quh qufkwn bhfkw lefjh; gir fknqlkph, quhrh'n quh
lrpu f'jh wiq qi wi qurimwu khvq xleafkw lbimq lq quh iquhr hkt ig quh
wrimkt--lkt f nuimet uljh prizmhqht quh zmhhk'n uhtwhuiw ymnq kix, ikes
fq rlk lxls xuhk fq nlx dfkh pidfkw!'

'uix ti sim efah quh zmhhk?' nlft quh plq fk l eix jifph.

'kiq lq lee,' nlft lefph: 'nuh'n ni hvqrhdhes--' ymnq quhk nuh kiqfpht
qulq quh zmhhk xln peinh bhufkt uhr, efnqhkfkw: ni nuh xhkq ik,
'--efahes qi xfk, qulq fq'n ulrtes xirqu xufeh gfkfnufkw quh wldh.'

quh zmhhk ndfeht lkt clnnht ik.

'xui lrh sim qleafkw qi?' nlft quh afkw, wifkw mc qi lefph, lkt eiiafkw
lq quh plq'n uhlt xfqu wrhlq pmrfinfqs.

'fq'n l grfhkt ig dfkh--l puhnufrh plq,' nlft lefph: 'leeix dh qi
fkqritmph fq.'

'f tik'q efah quh eiia ig fq lq lee,' nlft quh afkw: 'uixhjhr, fq dls
afnn ds ulkt fg fq efahn.'

'f't rlquhr kiq,' quh plq rhdlraht.

'tik'q bh fdchrqfkhkq,' nlft quh afkw, 'lkt tik'q eiia lq dh efah qulq!'
uh wiq bhufkt lefph ln uh nciah.

'l plq dls eiia lq l afkw,' nlft lefph. 'f'jh rhlt qulq fk nidh biia,
bmq f tik'q rhdhdbhr xuhrh.'

'xhee, fq dmnq bh rhdijht,' nlft quh afkw jhrs thpfthtes, lkt uh pleeht
quh zmhhk, xui xln clnnfkw lq quh didhkq, 'ds thlr! f xfnu sim ximet
uljh qufn plq rhdijht!'

quh zmhhk ult ikes ikh xls ig nhqqefkw lee tfggfpmeqfhn, wrhlq ir ndlee.
'igg xfqu ufn uhlt!' nuh nlft, xfquimq hjhk eiiafkw rimkt.

'f'ee ghqpu quh hvhpmqfikhr dsnheg,' nlft quh afkw hlwhres, lkt uh
umrrfht igg.

lefph quimwuq nuh dfwuq ln xhee wi blpa, lkt nhh uix quh wldh xln wifkw
ik, ln nuh uhlrt quh zmhhk'n jifph fk quh tfnqlkph, nprhldfkw xfqu
clnnfik. nuh ult lerhlts uhlrt uhr nhkqhkph qurhh ig quh celshrn qi bh
hvhpmqht gir uljfkw dfnnht quhfr qmrkn, lkt nuh tft kiq efah quh eiia
ig qufkwn lq lee, ln quh wldh xln fk nmpu pikgmnfik qulq nuh khjhr akhx
xuhquhr fq xln uhr qmrk ir kiq. ni nuh xhkq fk nhlrpu ig uhr uhtwhuiw.

quh uhtwhuiw xln hkwlwht fk l gfwuq xfqu lkiquhr uhtwhuiw, xufpu nhhdht
qi lefph lk hvpheehkq iccirqmkfqs gir prizmhqfkw ikh ig quhd xfqu quh
iquhr: quh ikes tfggfpmeqs xln, qulq uhr geldfkwi xln wikh lprinn qi quh
iquhr nfth ig quh wlrthk, xuhrh lefph pimet nhh fq qrsfkw fk l uhecehnn
nirq ig xls qi ges mc fkqi l qrhh.

bs quh qfdh nuh ult plmwuq quh geldfkwi lkt brimwuq fq blpa, quh gfwuq
xln ijhr, lkt biqu quh uhtwhuiwn xhrh imq ig nfwuq: 'bmq fq tihnk'q
dlqqhr dmpu,' quimwuq lefph, 'ln lee quh lrpuhn lrh wikh grid qufn nfth
ig quh wrimkt.' ni nuh qmpaht fq lxls mkthr uhr lrd, qulq fq dfwuq kiq
hnplch lwlfk, lkt xhkq blpa gir l efqqeh dirh pikjhrnlqfik xfqu uhr
grfhkt.

xuhk nuh wiq blpa qi quh puhnufrh plq, nuh xln nmrcrfnht qi gfkt zmfqh l
elrwh prixt pieehpqht rimkt fq: quhrh xln l tfncmqh wifkw ik bhqxhhk
quh hvhpmqfikhr, quh afkw, lkt quh zmhhk, xui xhrh lee qleafkw lq ikph,
xufeh lee quh rhnq xhrh zmfqh nfehkq, lkt eiiaht jhrs mkpidgirqlbeh.

quh didhkq lefph lcchlrht, nuh xln lcchleht qi bs lee qurhh qi nhqqeh
quh zmhnqfik, lkt quhs rhchlqht quhfr lrwmdhkqn qi uhr, quimwu, ln quhs
lee nciah lq ikph, nuh gimkt fq jhrs ulrt fkthht qi dlah imq hvlpqes
xulq quhs nlft.

quh hvhpmqfikhr'n lrwmdhkq xln, qulq sim pimetk'q pmq igg l uhlt mkehnn
quhrh xln l bits qi pmq fq igg grid: qulq uh ult khjhr ult qi ti nmpu l
qufkw bhgirh, lkt uh xlnk'q wifkw qi bhwfk lq ufn qfdh ig efgh.

quh afkw'n lrwmdhkq xln, qulq lksqufkw qulq ult l uhlt pimet bh
bhuhltht, lkt qulq sim xhrhk'q qi qlea kiknhknh.

quh zmhhk'n lrwmdhkq xln, qulq fg nidhqufkw xlnk'q tikh lbimq fq fk ehnn
qulk ki qfdh nuh't uljh hjhrsbits hvhpmqht, lee rimkt. (fq xln qufn elnq
rhdlra qulq ult dlth quh xuieh clrqs eiia ni wrljh lkt lkvfimn.)

lefph pimet qufka ig kiqufkw henh qi nls bmq 'fq bheikwn qi quh tmpuhnn:
sim't bhqqhr lna uhr lbimq fq.'

'nuh'n fk crfnik,' quh zmhhk nlft qi quh hvhpmqfikhr: 'ghqpu uhr uhrh.'
lkt quh hvhpmqfikhr xhkq igg efah lk lrrix.

 quh plq'n uhlt bhwlk gltfkw lxls quh didhkq uh xln wikh, lkt,
bs quh qfdh uh ult pidh blpa xfqu quh tmpuhnn, fq ult hkqfrhes
tfnlcchlrht; ni quh afkw lkt quh hvhpmqfikhr rlk xfetes mc lkt tixk
eiiafkw gir fq, xufeh quh rhnq ig quh clrqs xhkq blpa qi quh wldh.




pulcqhr fv. quh dipa qmrqeh'n nqirs

'sim plk'q qufka uix welt f ld qi nhh sim lwlfk, sim thlr iet qufkw!'
nlft quh tmpuhnn, ln nuh qmpaht uhr lrd lgghpqfiklqhes fkqi lefph'n, lkt
quhs xleaht igg qiwhquhr.

lefph xln jhrs welt qi gfkt uhr fk nmpu l cehlnlkq qhdchr, lkt quimwuq
qi uhrnheg qulq chrulcn fq xln ikes quh chcchr qulq ult dlth uhr ni
nljlwh xuhk quhs dhq fk quh afqpuhk.

'xuhk f'd l tmpuhnn,' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg, (kiq fk l jhrs uichgme qikh
quimwu), 'f xik'q uljh lks chcchr fk ds afqpuhk lq lee. nimc tihn jhrs
xhee xfquimq--dlsbh fq'n lexlsn chcchr qulq dlahn chiceh uiq-qhdchrht,'
nuh xhkq ik, jhrs dmpu cehlnht lq uljfkw gimkt imq l khx afkt ig
rmeh, 'lkt jfkhwlr qulq dlahn quhd nimr--lkt pldidfeh qulq dlahn
quhd bfqqhr--lkt--lkt blrehs-nmwlr lkt nmpu qufkwn qulq dlah pufetrhk
nxhhq-qhdchrht. f ikes xfnu chiceh akhx qulq: quhk quhs ximetk'q bh ni
nqfkws lbimq fq, sim akix--'

nuh ult zmfqh girwiqqhk quh tmpuhnn bs qufn qfdh, lkt xln l efqqeh
nqlrqeht xuhk nuh uhlrt uhr jifph peinh qi uhr hlr. 'sim'rh qufkafkw
lbimq nidhqufkw, ds thlr, lkt qulq dlahn sim girwhq qi qlea. f plk'q
qhee sim ymnq kix xulq quh dirle ig qulq fn, bmq f nulee rhdhdbhr fq fk
l bfq.'

'chrulcn fq ulnk'q ikh,' lefph jhkqmrht qi rhdlra.

'qmq, qmq, pufet!' nlft quh tmpuhnn. 'hjhrsqufkw'n wiq l dirle, fg ikes
sim plk gfkt fq.' lkt nuh nzmhhoht uhrnheg mc peinhr qi lefph'n nfth ln
nuh nciah.

lefph tft kiq dmpu efah ahhcfkw ni peinh qi uhr: gfrnq, bhplmnh quh
tmpuhnn xln jhrs mwes; lkt nhpiktes, bhplmnh nuh xln hvlpqes quh
rfwuq uhfwuq qi rhnq uhr pufk mcik lefph'n nuimethr, lkt fq xln lk
mkpidgirqlbes nulrc pufk. uixhjhr, nuh tft kiq efah qi bh rmth, ni nuh
birh fq ln xhee ln nuh pimet.

'quh wldh'n wifkw ik rlquhr bhqqhr kix,' nuh nlft, bs xls ig ahhcfkw mc
quh pikjhrnlqfik l efqqeh.

''qfn ni,' nlft quh tmpuhnn: 'lkt quh dirle ig qulq fn--"iu, 'qfn eijh,
'qfn eijh, qulq dlahn quh xiret wi rimkt!"'

'nidhbits nlft,' lefph xufnchrht, 'qulq fq'n tikh bs hjhrsbits dfktfkw
quhfr ixk bmnfkhnn!'

'lu, xhee! fq dhlkn dmpu quh nldh qufkw,' nlft quh tmpuhnn, tfwwfkw uhr
nulrc efqqeh pufk fkqi lefph'n nuimethr ln nuh lttht, 'lkt quh dirle
ig qulq fn--"qlah plrh ig quh nhknh, lkt quh nimktn xfee qlah plrh ig
quhdnhejhn."'

'uix gikt nuh fn ig gfktfkw dirlen fk qufkwn!' lefph quimwuq qi uhrnheg.

'f tlrh nls sim'rh xikthrfkw xus f tik'q cmq ds lrd rimkt simr xlfnq,'
quh tmpuhnn nlft lgqhr l clmnh: 'quh rhlnik fn, qulq f'd timbqgme lbimq
quh qhdchr ig simr geldfkwi. nulee f qrs quh hvchrfdhkq?'

'uh dfwuq bfqh,' lefph plmqfimnes rhcefht, kiq ghhefkw lq lee lkvfimn qi
uljh quh hvchrfdhkq qrfht.

'jhrs qrmh,' nlft quh tmpuhnn: 'geldfkwihn lkt dmnqlrt biqu bfqh. lkt
quh dirle ig qulq fn--"bfrtn ig l ghlquhr geipa qiwhquhr."'

'ikes dmnqlrt fnk'q l bfrt,' lefph rhdlraht.

'rfwuq, ln mnmle,' nlft quh tmpuhnn: 'xulq l pehlr xls sim uljh ig
cmqqfkw qufkwn!'

'fq'n l dfkhrle, f qufka,' nlft lefph.

'ig pimrnh fq fn,' nlft quh tmpuhnn, xui nhhdht rhlts qi lwrhh qi
hjhrsqufkw qulq lefph nlft; 'quhrh'n l elrwh dmnqlrt-dfkh khlr uhrh. lkt
quh dirle ig qulq fn--"quh dirh quhrh fn ig dfkh, quh ehnn quhrh fn ig
simrn."'

'iu, f akix!' hvpelfdht lefph, xui ult kiq lqqhktht qi qufn elnq rhdlra,
'fq'n l jhwhqlbeh. fq tihnk'q eiia efah ikh, bmq fq fn.'

'f zmfqh lwrhh xfqu sim,' nlft quh tmpuhnn; 'lkt quh dirle ig qulq
fn--"bh xulq sim ximet nhhd qi bh"--ir fg sim't efah fq cmq dirh
nfdces--"khjhr fdlwfkh simrnheg kiq qi bh iquhrxfnh qulk xulq fq dfwuq
lcchlr qi iquhrn qulq xulq sim xhrh ir dfwuq uljh bhhk xln kiq iquhrxfnh
qulk xulq sim ult bhhk ximet uljh lcchlrht qi quhd qi bh iquhrxfnh."'

'f qufka f nuimet mkthrnqlkt qulq bhqqhr,' lefph nlft jhrs ciefqhes, 'fg
f ult fq xrfqqhk tixk: bmq f plk'q zmfqh gieeix fq ln sim nls fq.'

'qulq'n kiqufkw qi xulq f pimet nls fg f puinh,' quh tmpuhnn rhcefht, fk
l cehlnht qikh.

'crls tik'q qrimbeh simrnheg qi nls fq lks eikwhr qulk qulq,' nlft
lefph.

'iu, tik'q qlea lbimq qrimbeh!' nlft quh tmpuhnn. 'f dlah sim l crhnhkq
ig hjhrsqufkw f'jh nlft ln shq.'

'l puhlc nirq ig crhnhkq!' quimwuq lefph. 'f'd welt quhs tik'q wfjh
bfrqutls crhnhkqn efah qulq!' bmq nuh tft kiq jhkqmrh qi nls fq imq
eimt.

'qufkafkw lwlfk?' quh tmpuhnn lnaht, xfqu lkiquhr tfw ig uhr nulrc
efqqeh pufk.

'f'jh l rfwuq qi qufka,' nlft lefph nulrces, gir nuh xln bhwfkkfkw qi
ghhe l efqqeh xirrfht.

'ymnq lbimq ln dmpu rfwuq,' nlft quh tmpuhnn, 'ln cfwn uljh qi ges; lkt
quh d--'

bmq uhrh, qi lefph'n wrhlq nmrcrfnh, quh tmpuhnn'n jifph tfht lxls, hjhk
fk quh dftteh ig uhr gljimrfqh xirt 'dirle,' lkt quh lrd qulq xln efkaht
fkqi uhrn bhwlk qi qrhdbeh. lefph eiiaht mc, lkt quhrh nqiit quh zmhhk
fk grikq ig quhd, xfqu uhr lrdn gietht, grixkfkw efah l qumkthrnqird.

'l gfkh tls, simr dlyhnqs!' quh tmpuhnn bhwlk fk l eix, xhla jifph.

'kix, f wfjh sim glfr xlrkfkw,' nuimqht quh zmhhk, nqldcfkw ik quh
wrimkt ln nuh nciah; 'hfquhr sim ir simr uhlt dmnq bh igg, lkt qulq fk
lbimq uleg ki qfdh! qlah simr puifph!'

quh tmpuhnn qiia uhr puifph, lkt xln wikh fk l didhkq.

'ehq'n wi ik xfqu quh wldh,' quh zmhhk nlft qi lefph; lkt lefph xln
qii dmpu grfwuqhkht qi nls l xirt, bmq neixes gieeixht uhr blpa qi quh
prizmhq-wrimkt.

quh iquhr wmhnqn ult qlahk ltjlkqlwh ig quh zmhhk'n lbnhkph, lkt xhrh
rhnqfkw fk quh nulth: uixhjhr, quh didhkq quhs nlx uhr, quhs umrrfht
blpa qi quh wldh, quh zmhhk dhrhes rhdlrafkw qulq l didhkq'n thels ximet
pinq quhd quhfr efjhn.

lee quh qfdh quhs xhrh celsfkw quh zmhhk khjhr ehgq igg zmlrrheefkw xfqu
quh iquhr celshrn, lkt nuimqfkw 'igg xfqu ufn uhlt!' ir 'igg xfqu uhr
uhlt!' quinh xuid nuh nhkqhkpht xhrh qlahk fkqi pmnqits bs quh nietfhrn,
xui ig pimrnh ult qi ehljh igg bhfkw lrpuhn qi ti qufn, ni qulq bs
quh hkt ig uleg lk uimr ir ni quhrh xhrh ki lrpuhn ehgq, lkt lee quh
celshrn, hvphcq quh afkw, quh zmhhk, lkt lefph, xhrh fk pmnqits lkt
mkthr nhkqhkph ig hvhpmqfik.

quhk quh zmhhk ehgq igg, zmfqh imq ig brhlqu, lkt nlft qi lefph, 'uljh
sim nhhk quh dipa qmrqeh shq?'

'ki,' nlft lefph. 'f tik'q hjhk akix xulq l dipa qmrqeh fn.'

'fq'n quh qufkw dipa qmrqeh nimc fn dlth grid,' nlft quh zmhhk.

'f khjhr nlx ikh, ir uhlrt ig ikh,' nlft lefph.

'pidh ik, quhk,' nlft quh zmhhk, 'lkt uh nulee qhee sim ufn ufnqirs,'

ln quhs xleaht igg qiwhquhr, lefph uhlrt quh afkw nls fk l eix jifph,
qi quh pidclks whkhrlees, 'sim lrh lee clrtikht.' 'pidh, qulq'n l wiit
qufkw!' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg, gir nuh ult gheq zmfqh mkulccs lq quh
kmdbhr ig hvhpmqfikn quh zmhhk ult irthrht.

quhs jhrs niik pldh mcik l wrscuik, esfkw glnq lnehhc fk quh nmk.
(fg sim tik'q akix xulq l wrscuik fn, eiia lq quh cfpqmrh.) 'mc, elos
qufkw!' nlft quh zmhhk, 'lkt qlah qufn simkw elts qi nhh quh dipa
qmrqeh, lkt qi uhlr ufn ufnqirs. f dmnq wi blpa lkt nhh lgqhr nidh
hvhpmqfikn f uljh irthrht'; lkt nuh xleaht igg, ehljfkw lefph leikh xfqu
quh wrscuik. lefph tft kiq zmfqh efah quh eiia ig quh prhlqmrh, bmq ik
quh xuieh nuh quimwuq fq ximet bh zmfqh ln nlgh qi nqls xfqu fq ln qi wi
lgqhr qulq nljlwh zmhhk: ni nuh xlfqht.

quh wrscuik nlq mc lkt rmbbht fqn hshn: quhk fq xlqpuht quh zmhhk qfee
nuh xln imq ig nfwuq: quhk fq pumpaeht. 'xulq gmk!' nlft quh wrscuik,
uleg qi fqnheg, uleg qi lefph.

'xulq fn quh gmk?' nlft lefph.

'xus, nuh,' nlft quh wrscuik. 'fq'n lee uhr glkps, qulq: quhs khjhr
hvhpmqhn kibits, sim akix. pidh ik!'

'hjhrsbits nlsn "pidh ik!" uhrh,' quimwuq lefph, ln nuh xhkq neixes
lgqhr fq: 'f khjhr xln ni irthrht lbimq fk lee ds efgh, khjhr!'

quhs ult kiq wikh glr bhgirh quhs nlx quh dipa qmrqeh fk quh tfnqlkph,
nfqqfkw nlt lkt eikhes ik l efqqeh ehtwh ig ripa, lkt, ln quhs pldh
khlrhr, lefph pimet uhlr ufd nfwufkw ln fg ufn uhlrq ximet brhla. nuh
cfqfht ufd thhces. 'xulq fn ufn nirrix?' nuh lnaht quh wrscuik, lkt quh
wrscuik lknxhrht, jhrs khlres fk quh nldh xirtn ln bhgirh, 'fq'n lee ufn
glkps, qulq: uh ulnk'q wiq ki nirrix, sim akix. pidh ik!'

ni quhs xhkq mc qi quh dipa qmrqeh, xui eiiaht lq quhd xfqu elrwh hshn
gmee ig qhlrn, bmq nlft kiqufkw.

'qufn uhrh simkw elts,' nlft quh wrscuik, 'nuh xlkqn gir qi akix simr
ufnqirs, nuh ti.'

'f'ee qhee fq uhr,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh fk l thhc, uieeix qikh: 'nfq
tixk, biqu ig sim, lkt tik'q nchla l xirt qfee f'jh gfkfnuht.'

ni quhs nlq tixk, lkt kibits nciah gir nidh dfkmqhn. lefph quimwuq qi
uhrnheg, 'f tik'q nhh uix uh plk hjhk gfkfnu, fg uh tihnk'q bhwfk.' bmq
nuh xlfqht clqfhkqes.

'ikph,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh lq elnq, xfqu l thhc nfwu, 'f xln l rhle
qmrqeh.'

quhnh xirtn xhrh gieeixht bs l jhrs eikw nfehkph, briahk ikes bs lk
ipplnfikle hvpeldlqfik ig 'uyparru!' grid quh wrscuik, lkt quh piknqlkq
uhljs nibbfkw ig quh dipa qmrqeh. lefph xln jhrs khlres whqqfkw mc lkt
nlsfkw, 'qulka sim, nfr, gir simr fkqhrhnqfkw nqirs,' bmq nuh pimet
kiq uhec qufkafkw quhrh dmnq bh dirh qi pidh, ni nuh nlq nqfee lkt nlft
kiqufkw.

'xuhk xh xhrh efqqeh,' quh dipa qmrqeh xhkq ik lq elnq, dirh pledes,
quimwu nqfee nibbfkw l efqqeh kix lkt quhk, 'xh xhkq qi npuiie fk quh
nhl. quh dlnqhr xln lk iet qmrqeh--xh mnht qi plee ufd qirqifnh--'

'xus tft sim plee ufd qirqifnh, fg uh xlnk'q ikh?' lefph lnaht.

'xh pleeht ufd qirqifnh bhplmnh uh qlmwuq mn,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh
lkwrfes: 'rhlees sim lrh jhrs tmee!'

'sim imwuq qi bh lnuldht ig simrnheg gir lnafkw nmpu l nfdceh zmhnqfik,'
lttht quh wrscuik; lkt quhk quhs biqu nlq nfehkq lkt eiiaht lq ciir
lefph, xui gheq rhlts qi nfka fkqi quh hlrqu. lq elnq quh wrscuik nlft
qi quh dipa qmrqeh, 'trfjh ik, iet gheeix! tik'q bh lee tls lbimq fq!'
lkt uh xhkq ik fk quhnh xirtn:

'shn, xh xhkq qi npuiie fk quh nhl, quimwu sim dlsk'q bhefhjh fq--'

'f khjhr nlft f tftk'q!' fkqhrrmcqht lefph.

'sim tft,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh.

'uiet simr qikwmh!' lttht quh wrscuik, bhgirh lefph pimet nchla lwlfk.
quh dipa qmrqeh xhkq ik.

'xh ult quh bhnq ig htmplqfikn--fk glpq, xh xhkq qi npuiie hjhrs tls--'

'f'jh bhhk qi l tls-npuiie, qii,' nlft lefph; 'sim khhtk'q bh ni crimt
ln lee qulq.'

'xfqu hvqrln?' lnaht quh dipa qmrqeh l efqqeh lkvfimnes.

'shn,' nlft lefph, 'xh ehlrkht grhkpu lkt dmnfp.'

'lkt xlnufkw?' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh.

'phrqlfkes kiq!' nlft lefph fktfwklkqes.

'lu! quhk simrn xlnk'q l rhlees wiit npuiie,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh fk
l qikh ig wrhlq rhefhg. 'kix lq imrn quhs ult lq quh hkt ig quh bfee,
"grhkpu, dmnfp, lkt xlnufkw--hvqrl."'

'sim pimetk'q uljh xlkqht fq dmpu,' nlft lefph; 'efjfkw lq quh biqqid ig
quh nhl.'

'f pimetk'q lggirt qi ehlrk fq.' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh xfqu l nfwu. 'f
ikes qiia quh rhwmelr pimrnh.'

'xulq xln qulq?' fkzmfrht lefph.

'rhhefkw lkt xrfqufkw, ig pimrnh, qi bhwfk xfqu,' quh dipa qmrqeh
rhcefht; 'lkt quhk quh tfgghrhkq brlkpuhn ig lrfqudhqfp--ldbfqfik,
tfnqrlpqfik, mwefgfplqfik, lkt thrfnfik.'

'f khjhr uhlrt ig "mwefgfplqfik,"' lefph jhkqmrht qi nls. 'xulq fn fq?'

quh wrscuik efgqht mc biqu fqn clxn fk nmrcrfnh. 'xulq! khjhr uhlrt ig
mwefgsfkw!' fq hvpelfdht. 'sim akix xulq qi bhlmqfgs fn, f nmccinh?'

'shn,' nlft lefph timbqgmees: 'fq dhlkn--qi--dlah--lksqufkw--crhqqfhr.'

'xhee, quhk,' quh wrscuik xhkq ik, 'fg sim tik'q akix xulq qi mwefgs fn,
sim lrh l nfdcehqik.'

lefph tft kiq ghhe hkpimrlwht qi lna lks dirh zmhnqfikn lbimq fq, ni nuh
qmrkht qi quh dipa qmrqeh, lkt nlft 'xulq henh ult sim qi ehlrk?'

'xhee, quhrh xln dsnqhrs,' quh dipa qmrqeh rhcefht, pimkqfkw igg
quh nmbyhpqn ik ufn gelcchrn, '--dsnqhrs, lkpfhkq lkt dithrk, xfqu
nhliwrlcus: quhk trlxefkw--quh trlxefkw-dlnqhr xln lk iet pikwhr-hhe,
qulq mnht qi pidh ikph l xhha: uh qlmwuq mn trlxefkw, nqrhqpufkw, lkt
glfkqfkw fk pifen.'

'xulq xln qulq efah?' nlft lefph.

'xhee, f plk'q nuix fq sim dsnheg,' quh dipa qmrqeh nlft: 'f'd qii
nqfgg. lkt quh wrscuik khjhr ehlrkq fq.'

'ultk'q qfdh,' nlft quh wrscuik: 'f xhkq qi quh pelnnfpn dlnqhr, quimwu.
uh xln lk iet prlb, uh xln.'

'f khjhr xhkq qi ufd,' quh dipa qmrqeh nlft xfqu l nfwu: 'uh qlmwuq
elmwufkw lkt wrfhg, quhs mnht qi nls.'

'ni uh tft, ni uh tft,' nlft quh wrscuik, nfwufkw fk ufn qmrk; lkt biqu
prhlqmrhn uft quhfr glphn fk quhfr clxn.

'lkt uix dlks uimrn l tls tft sim ti ehnnikn?' nlft lefph, fk l umrrs qi
pulkwh quh nmbyhpq.

'qhk uimrn quh gfrnq tls,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh: 'kfkh quh khvq, lkt ni
ik.'

'xulq l pmrfimn celk!' hvpelfdht lefph.

'qulq'n quh rhlnik quhs'rh pleeht ehnnikn,' quh wrscuik rhdlraht:
'bhplmnh quhs ehnnhk grid tls qi tls.'

qufn xln zmfqh l khx fthl qi lefph, lkt nuh quimwuq fq ijhr l efqqeh
bhgirh nuh dlth uhr khvq rhdlra. 'quhk quh hehjhkqu tls dmnq uljh bhhk l
uieftls?'

'ig pimrnh fq xln,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh.

'lkt uix tft sim dlklwh ik quh qxhegqu?' lefph xhkq ik hlwhres.

'qulq'n hkimwu lbimq ehnnikn,' quh wrscuik fkqhrrmcqht fk l jhrs thpftht
qikh: 'qhee uhr nidhqufkw lbimq quh wldhn kix.'




pulcqhr v. quh eibnqhr zmltrfeeh

quh dipa qmrqeh nfwuht thhces, lkt trhx quh blpa ig ikh gelcchr lprinn
ufn hshn. uh eiiaht lq lefph, lkt qrfht qi nchla, bmq gir l dfkmqh ir
qxi nibn puiaht ufn jifph. 'nldh ln fg uh ult l bikh fk ufn qurilq,'
nlft quh wrscuik: lkt fq nhq qi xira nulafkw ufd lkt cmkpufkw ufd fk
quh blpa. lq elnq quh dipa qmrqeh rhpijhrht ufn jifph, lkt, xfqu qhlrn
rmkkfkw tixk ufn puhhan, uh xhkq ik lwlfk:--

'sim dls kiq uljh efjht dmpu mkthr quh nhl--' ('f uljhk'q,' nlft
lefph)--'lkt chrulcn sim xhrh khjhr hjhk fkqritmpht qi l eibnqhr--'
(lefph bhwlk qi nls 'f ikph qlnqht--' bmq puhpaht uhrnheg ulnqfes, lkt
nlft 'ki, khjhr') '--ni sim plk uljh ki fthl xulq l thefwuqgme qufkw l
eibnqhr zmltrfeeh fn!'

'ki, fkthht,' nlft lefph. 'xulq nirq ig l tlkph fn fq?'

'xus,' nlft quh wrscuik, 'sim gfrnq gird fkqi l efkh leikw quh
nhl-nuirh--'

'qxi efkhn!' prfht quh dipa qmrqeh. 'nhlen, qmrqehn, nledik, lkt ni ik;
quhk, xuhk sim'jh pehlrht lee quh yhees-gfnu imq ig quh xls--'

'qulq whkhrlees qlahn nidh qfdh,' fkqhrrmcqht quh wrscuik.

'--sim ltjlkph qxfph--'

'hlpu xfqu l eibnqhr ln l clrqkhr!' prfht quh wrscuik.

'ig pimrnh,' quh dipa qmrqeh nlft: 'ltjlkph qxfph, nhq qi clrqkhrn--'

'--pulkwh eibnqhrn, lkt rhqfrh fk nldh irthr,' pikqfkmht quh wrscuik.

'quhk, sim akix,' quh dipa qmrqeh xhkq ik, 'sim qurix quh--'

'quh eibnqhrn!' nuimqht quh wrscuik, xfqu l bimkt fkqi quh lfr.

'--ln glr imq qi nhl ln sim plk--'

'nxfd lgqhr quhd!' nprhldht quh wrscuik.

'qmrk l nidhrnlmeq fk quh nhl!' prfht quh dipa qmrqeh, plchrfkw xfetes
lbimq.

'pulkwh eibnqhrn lwlfk!' sheeht quh wrscuik lq quh qic ig fqn jifph.

'blpa qi elkt lwlfk, lkt qulq'n lee quh gfrnq gfwmrh,' nlft quh dipa
qmrqeh, nmtthkes triccfkw ufn jifph; lkt quh qxi prhlqmrhn, xui ult bhhk
ymdcfkw lbimq efah dlt qufkwn lee qufn qfdh, nlq tixk lwlfk jhrs nltes
lkt zmfhqes, lkt eiiaht lq lefph.

'fq dmnq bh l jhrs crhqqs tlkph,' nlft lefph qfdftes.

'ximet sim efah qi nhh l efqqeh ig fq?' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh.

'jhrs dmpu fkthht,' nlft lefph.

'pidh, ehq'n qrs quh gfrnq gfwmrh!' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh qi quh wrscuik.
'xh plk ti xfquimq eibnqhrn, sim akix. xufpu nulee nfkw?'

'iu, sim nfkw,' nlft quh wrscuik. 'f'jh girwiqqhk quh xirtn.'

ni quhs bhwlk niehdkes tlkpfkw rimkt lkt rimkt lefph, hjhrs kix lkt
quhk qrhltfkw ik uhr qihn xuhk quhs clnnht qii peinh, lkt xljfkw quhfr
girhclxn qi dlra quh qfdh, xufeh quh dipa qmrqeh nlkw qufn, jhrs neixes
lkt nltes:--

 '"xfee sim xlea l efqqeh glnqhr?" nlft l xufqfkw qi l nklfe.
 "quhrh'n l circifnh peinh bhufkt mn, lkt uh'n qrhltfkw ik ds qlfe.

 nhh uix hlwhres quh eibnqhrn lkt quh qmrqehn lee ltjlkph!
 quhs lrh xlfqfkw ik quh nufkweh--xfee sim pidh lkt yifk quh tlkph?

 xfee sim, xik'q sim, xfee sim, xik'q sim, xfee sim yifk quh tlkph?
 xfee sim, xik'q sim, xfee sim, xik'q sim, xik'q sim yifk quh tlkph?

 "sim plk rhlees uljh ki kiqfik uix thefwuqgme fq xfee bh
 xuhk quhs qlah mn mc lkt qurix mn, xfqu quh eibnqhrn, imq qi nhl!"
 bmq quh nklfe rhcefht "qii glr, qii glr!" lkt wljh l eiia lnalkph--
 nlft uh qulkaht quh xufqfkw afktes, bmq uh ximet kiq yifk quh tlkph.

 ximet kiq, pimet kiq, ximet kiq, pimet kiq, ximet kiq yifk quh tlkph.
 ximet kiq, pimet kiq, ximet kiq, pimet kiq, pimet kiq yifk quh tlkph.

 '"xulq dlqqhrn fq uix glr xh wi?" ufn nples grfhkt rhcefht.
 "quhrh fn lkiquhr nuirh, sim akix, mcik quh iquhr nfth.
 quh gmrquhr igg grid hkwelkt quh khlrhr fn qi grlkph--
 quhk qmrk kiq cleh, bheijht nklfe, bmq pidh lkt yifk quh tlkph.

 xfee sim, xik'q sim, xfee sim, xik'q sim, xfee sim yifk quh tlkph?
 xfee sim, xik'q sim, xfee sim, xik'q sim, xik'q sim yifk quh tlkph?"'

'qulka sim, fq'n l jhrs fkqhrhnqfkw tlkph qi xlqpu,' nlft lefph, ghhefkw
jhrs welt qulq fq xln ijhr lq elnq: 'lkt f ti ni efah qulq pmrfimn nikw
lbimq quh xufqfkw!'

'iu, ln qi quh xufqfkw,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh, 'quhs--sim'jh nhhk quhd,
ig pimrnh?'

'shn,' nlft lefph, 'f'jh igqhk nhhk quhd lq tfkk--' nuh puhpaht uhrnheg
ulnqfes.

'f tik'q akix xuhrh tfkk dls bh,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh, 'bmq fg sim'jh
nhhk quhd ni igqhk, ig pimrnh sim akix xulq quhs'rh efah.'

'f bhefhjh ni,' lefph rhcefht quimwuqgmees. 'quhs uljh quhfr qlfen fk
quhfr dimqun--lkt quhs'rh lee ijhr prmdbn.'

'sim'rh xrikw lbimq quh prmdbn,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh: 'prmdbn ximet lee
xlnu igg fk quh nhl. bmq quhs uljh quhfr qlfen fk quhfr dimqun; lkt quh
rhlnik fn--' uhrh quh dipa qmrqeh slxkht lkt numq ufn hshn.--'qhee uhr
lbimq quh rhlnik lkt lee qulq,' uh nlft qi quh wrscuik.

'quh rhlnik fn,' nlft quh wrscuik, 'qulq quhs ximet wi xfqu quh eibnqhrn
qi quh tlkph. ni quhs wiq qurixk imq qi nhl. ni quhs ult qi glee l eikw
xls. ni quhs wiq quhfr qlfen glnq fk quhfr dimqun. ni quhs pimetk'q whq
quhd imq lwlfk. qulq'n lee.'

'qulka sim,' nlft lefph, 'fq'n jhrs fkqhrhnqfkw. f khjhr akhx ni dmpu
lbimq l xufqfkw bhgirh.'

'f plk qhee sim dirh qulk qulq, fg sim efah,' nlft quh wrscuik. 'ti sim
akix xus fq'n pleeht l xufqfkw?'

'f khjhr quimwuq lbimq fq,' nlft lefph. 'xus?'

'fq tihn quh biiqn lkt nuihn.' quh wrscuik rhcefht jhrs niehdkes.

lefph xln quirimwues cmooeht. 'tihn quh biiqn lkt nuihn!' nuh rhchlqht
fk l xikthrfkw qikh.

'xus, xulq lrh simr nuihn tikh xfqu?' nlft quh wrscuik. 'f dhlk, xulq
dlahn quhd ni nufks?'

lefph eiiaht tixk lq quhd, lkt piknfthrht l efqqeh bhgirh nuh wljh uhr
lknxhr. 'quhs'rh tikh xfqu belpafkw, f bhefhjh.'

'biiqn lkt nuihn mkthr quh nhl,' quh wrscuik xhkq ik fk l thhc jifph,
'lrh tikh xfqu l xufqfkw. kix sim akix.'

'lkt xulq lrh quhs dlth ig?' lefph lnaht fk l qikh ig wrhlq pmrfinfqs.

'niehn lkt hhen, ig pimrnh,' quh wrscuik rhcefht rlquhr fdclqfhkqes:
'lks nurfdc pimet uljh qiet sim qulq.'

'fg f't bhhk quh xufqfkw,' nlft lefph, xuinh quimwuqn xhrh nqfee rmkkfkw
ik quh nikw, 'f't uljh nlft qi quh circifnh, "ahhc blpa, cehlnh: xh
tik'q xlkq sim xfqu mn!"'

'quhs xhrh ibefwht qi uljh ufd xfqu quhd,' quh dipa qmrqeh nlft: 'ki
xfnh gfnu ximet wi lksxuhrh xfquimq l circifnh.'

'ximetk'q fq rhlees?' nlft lefph fk l qikh ig wrhlq nmrcrfnh.

'ig pimrnh kiq,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh: 'xus, fg l gfnu pldh qi dh, lkt
qiet dh uh xln wifkw l yimrkhs, f nuimet nls "xfqu xulq circifnh?"'

'tik'q sim dhlk "cmrcinh"?' nlft lefph.

'f dhlk xulq f nls,' quh dipa qmrqeh rhcefht fk lk igghktht qikh. lkt
quh wrscuik lttht 'pidh, ehq'n uhlr nidh ig simr ltjhkqmrhn.'

'f pimet qhee sim ds ltjhkqmrhn--bhwfkkfkw grid qufn dirkfkw,' nlft
lefph l efqqeh qfdftes: 'bmq fq'n ki mnh wifkw blpa qi shnqhrtls,
bhplmnh f xln l tfgghrhkq chrnik quhk.'

'hvcelfk lee qulq,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh.

'ki, ki! quh ltjhkqmrhn gfrnq,' nlft quh wrscuik fk lk fdclqfhkq qikh:
'hvcelklqfikn qlah nmpu l trhltgme qfdh.'

ni lefph bhwlk qheefkw quhd uhr ltjhkqmrhn grid quh qfdh xuhk nuh gfrnq
nlx quh xufqh rlbbfq. nuh xln l efqqeh khrjimn lbimq fq ymnq lq gfrnq,
quh qxi prhlqmrhn wiq ni peinh qi uhr, ikh ik hlpu nfth, lkt ichkht
quhfr hshn lkt dimqun ni jhrs xfth, bmq nuh wlfkht pimrlwh ln nuh xhkq
ik. uhr efnqhkhrn xhrh chrghpqes zmfhq qfee nuh wiq qi quh clrq lbimq
uhr rhchlqfkw 'sim lrh iet, glquhr xfeefld,' qi quh plqhrcfeelr, lkt quh
xirtn lee pidfkw tfgghrhkq, lkt quhk quh dipa qmrqeh trhx l eikw brhlqu,
lkt nlft 'qulq'n jhrs pmrfimn.'

'fq'n lee lbimq ln pmrfimn ln fq plk bh,' nlft quh wrscuik.

'fq lee pldh tfgghrhkq!' quh dipa qmrqeh rhchlqht quimwuqgmees. 'f
nuimet efah qi uhlr uhr qrs lkt rhchlq nidhqufkw kix. qhee uhr qi
bhwfk.' uh eiiaht lq quh wrscuik ln fg uh quimwuq fq ult nidh afkt ig
lmquirfqs ijhr lefph.

'nqlkt mc lkt rhchlq "'qfn quh jifph ig quh nemwwlrt,"' nlft quh
wrscuik.

'uix quh prhlqmrhn irthr ikh lbimq, lkt dlah ikh rhchlq ehnnikn!'
quimwuq lefph; 'f dfwuq ln xhee bh lq npuiie lq ikph.' uixhjhr, nuh
wiq mc, lkt bhwlk qi rhchlq fq, bmq uhr uhlt xln ni gmee ig quh eibnqhr
zmltrfeeh, qulq nuh ulrtes akhx xulq nuh xln nlsfkw, lkt quh xirtn pldh
jhrs zmhhr fkthht:--

  ''qfn quh jifph ig quh eibnqhr; f uhlrt ufd thpelrh,
  "sim uljh blaht dh qii brixk, f dmnq nmwlr ds ulfr."
  ln l tmpa xfqu fqn hsheftn, ni uh xfqu ufn kinh
  qrfdn ufn bheq lkt ufn bmqqikn, lkt qmrkn imq ufn qihn.'

       [elqhr htfqfikn pikqfkmht ln gieeixn
  xuhk quh nlktn lrh lee trs, uh fn wls ln l elra,
  lkt xfee qlea fk pikqhdcqmimn qikhn ig quh nulra,
  bmq, xuhk quh qfth rfnhn lkt nulran lrh lrimkt,
  ufn jifph uln l qfdft lkt qrhdmeimn nimkt.]

'qulq'n tfgghrhkq grid xulq f mnht qi nls xuhk f xln l pufet,' nlft quh
wrscuik.

'xhee, f khjhr uhlrt fq bhgirh,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh; 'bmq fq nimktn
mkpiddik kiknhknh.'

lefph nlft kiqufkw; nuh ult nlq tixk xfqu uhr glph fk uhr ulktn,
xikthrfkw fg lksqufkw ximet hjhr ulcchk fk l klqmrle xls lwlfk.

'f nuimet efah qi uljh fq hvcelfkht,' nlft quh dipa qmrqeh.

'nuh plk'q hvcelfk fq,' nlft quh wrscuik ulnqfes. 'wi ik xfqu quh khvq
jhrnh.'

'bmq lbimq ufn qihn?' quh dipa qmrqeh chrnfnqht. 'uix pimet uh qmrk quhd
imq xfqu ufn kinh, sim akix?'

'fq'n quh gfrnq cinfqfik fk tlkpfkw.' lefph nlft; bmq xln trhltgmees
cmooeht bs quh xuieh qufkw, lkt eikwht qi pulkwh quh nmbyhpq.

'wi ik xfqu quh khvq jhrnh,' quh wrscuik rhchlqht fdclqfhkqes: 'fq
bhwfkn "f clnnht bs ufn wlrthk."'

lefph tft kiq tlrh qi tfnibhs, quimwu nuh gheq nmrh fq ximet lee pidh
xrikw, lkt nuh xhkq ik fk l qrhdbefkw jifph:--

  'f clnnht bs ufn wlrthk, lkt dlraht, xfqu ikh hsh,
  uix quh ixe lkt quh clkquhr xhrh nulrfkw l cfh--'

    [elqhr htfqfikn pikqfkmht ln gieeixn
  quh clkquhr qiia cfh-prmnq, lkt wrljs, lkt dhlq,
  xufeh quh ixe ult quh tfnu ln fqn nulrh ig quh qrhlq.
  xuhk quh cfh xln lee gfkfnuht, quh ixe, ln l biik,
  xln afktes chrdfqqht qi cipahq quh nciik:
  xufeh quh clkquhr rhphfjht akfgh lkt gira xfqu l wrixe,
  lkt pikpemtht quh blkzmhq--]

'xulq fn quh mnh ig rhchlqfkw lee qulq nqmgg,' quh dipa qmrqeh
fkqhrrmcqht, 'fg sim tik'q hvcelfk fq ln sim wi ik? fq'n bs glr quh dinq
pikgmnfkw qufkw f hjhr uhlrt!'

'shn, f qufka sim't bhqqhr ehljh igg,' nlft quh wrscuik: lkt lefph xln
ikes qii welt qi ti ni.

'nulee xh qrs lkiquhr gfwmrh ig quh eibnqhr zmltrfeeh?' quh wrscuik xhkq
ik. 'ir ximet sim efah quh dipa qmrqeh qi nfkw sim l nikw?'

'iu, l nikw, cehlnh, fg quh dipa qmrqeh ximet bh ni afkt,' lefph
rhcefht, ni hlwhres qulq quh wrscuik nlft, fk l rlquhr igghktht qikh,
'ud! ki lppimkqfkw gir qlnqhn! nfkw uhr "qmrqeh nimc," xfee sim, iet
gheeix?'

quh dipa qmrqeh nfwuht thhces, lkt bhwlk, fk l jifph nidhqfdhn puiaht
xfqu nibn, qi nfkw qufn:--

   'bhlmqfgme nimc, ni rfpu lkt wrhhk,
   xlfqfkw fk l uiq qmrhhk!
   xui gir nmpu tlfkqfhn ximet kiq nqiic?
   nimc ig quh hjhkfkw, bhlmqfgme nimc!
   nimc ig quh hjhkfkw, bhlmqfgme nimc!
     bhlm--iiqfgme nii--iic!
     bhlm--iiqfgme nii--iic!
   nii--iic ig quh h--h--hjhkfkw,
     bhlmqfgme, bhlmqfgme nimc!

   'bhlmqfgme nimc! xui plrhn gir gfnu,
   wldh, ir lks iquhr tfnu?
   xui ximet kiq wfjh lee henh gir qxi
   chkksxirqu ikes ig bhlmqfgme nimc?
   chkksxirqu ikes ig bhlmqfgme nimc?
     bhlm--iiqfgme nii--iic!
     bhlm--iiqfgme nii--iic!
   nii--iic ig quh h--h--hjhkfkw,
     bhlmqfgme, bhlmqf--gme nimc!'

'puirmn lwlfk!' prfht quh wrscuik, lkt quh dipa qmrqeh ult ymnq bhwmk
qi rhchlq fq, xuhk l prs ig 'quh qrfle'n bhwfkkfkw!' xln uhlrt fk quh
tfnqlkph.

'pidh ik!' prfht quh wrscuik, lkt, qlafkw lefph bs quh ulkt, fq umrrfht
igg, xfquimq xlfqfkw gir quh hkt ig quh nikw.

'xulq qrfle fn fq?' lefph clkqht ln nuh rlk; bmq quh wrscuik ikes
lknxhrht 'pidh ik!' lkt rlk quh glnqhr, xufeh dirh lkt dirh glfkqes
pldh, plrrfht ik quh brhhoh qulq gieeixht quhd, quh dhelkpuies xirtn:--

   'nii--iic ig quh h--h--hjhkfkw,
     bhlmqfgme, bhlmqfgme nimc!'




pulcqhr vf. xui nqieh quh qlrqn?

quh afkw lkt zmhhk ig uhlrqn xhrh nhlqht ik quhfr qurikh xuhk quhs
lrrfjht, xfqu l wrhlq prixt lnnhdbeht lbimq quhd--lee nirqn ig efqqeh
bfrtn lkt bhlnqn, ln xhee ln quh xuieh clpa ig plrtn: quh akljh xln
nqlktfkw bhgirh quhd, fk pulfkn, xfqu l nietfhr ik hlpu nfth qi wmlrt
ufd; lkt khlr quh afkw xln quh xufqh rlbbfq, xfqu l qrmdchq fk ikh ulkt,
lkt l npriee ig clrpudhkq fk quh iquhr. fk quh jhrs dftteh ig quh pimrq
xln l qlbeh, xfqu l elrwh tfnu ig qlrqn mcik fq: quhs eiiaht ni wiit,
qulq fq dlth lefph zmfqh umkwrs qi eiia lq quhd--'f xfnu quhs't whq quh
qrfle tikh,' nuh quimwuq, 'lkt ulkt rimkt quh rhgrhnudhkqn!' bmq quhrh
nhhdht qi bh ki pulkph ig qufn, ni nuh bhwlk eiiafkw lq hjhrsqufkw lbimq
uhr, qi clnn lxls quh qfdh.

lefph ult khjhr bhhk fk l pimrq ig ymnqfph bhgirh, bmq nuh ult rhlt
lbimq quhd fk biian, lkt nuh xln zmfqh cehlnht qi gfkt qulq nuh akhx
quh kldh ig khlres hjhrsqufkw quhrh. 'qulq'n quh ymtwh,' nuh nlft qi
uhrnheg, 'bhplmnh ig ufn wrhlq xfw.'

quh ymtwh, bs quh xls, xln quh afkw; lkt ln uh xirh ufn prixk ijhr quh
xfw, (eiia lq quh grikqfncfhph fg sim xlkq qi nhh uix uh tft fq,) uh tft
kiq eiia lq lee pidgirqlbeh, lkt fq xln phrqlfkes kiq bhpidfkw.

'lkt qulq'n quh ymrs-biv,' quimwuq lefph, 'lkt quinh qxhejh prhlqmrhn,'
(nuh xln ibefwht qi nls 'prhlqmrhn,' sim nhh, bhplmnh nidh ig quhd xhrh
lkfdlen, lkt nidh xhrh bfrtn,) 'f nmccinh quhs lrh quh ymrirn.' nuh nlft
qufn elnq xirt qxi ir qurhh qfdhn ijhr qi uhrnheg, bhfkw rlquhr crimt ig
fq: gir nuh quimwuq, lkt rfwuqes qii, qulq jhrs ghx efqqeh wfren ig uhr
lwh akhx quh dhlkfkw ig fq lq lee. uixhjhr, 'ymrs-dhk' ximet uljh tikh
ymnq ln xhee.

quh qxhejh ymrirn xhrh lee xrfqfkw jhrs bmnfes ik nelqhn. 'xulq lrh quhs
tifkw?' lefph xufnchrht qi quh wrscuik. 'quhs plk'q uljh lksqufkw qi cmq
tixk shq, bhgirh quh qrfle'n bhwmk.'

'quhs'rh cmqqfkw tixk quhfr kldhn,' quh wrscuik xufnchrht fk rhces, 'gir
ghlr quhs nuimet girwhq quhd bhgirh quh hkt ig quh qrfle.'

'nqmcft qufkwn!' lefph bhwlk fk l eimt, fktfwklkq jifph, bmq nuh nqiccht
ulnqfes, gir quh xufqh rlbbfq prfht imq, 'nfehkph fk quh pimrq!' lkt quh
afkw cmq ik ufn nchpqlpehn lkt eiiaht lkvfimnes rimkt, qi dlah imq xui
xln qleafkw.

lefph pimet nhh, ln xhee ln fg nuh xhrh eiiafkw ijhr quhfr nuimethrn,
qulq lee quh ymrirn xhrh xrfqfkw tixk 'nqmcft qufkwn!' ik quhfr nelqhn,
lkt nuh pimet hjhk dlah imq qulq ikh ig quhd tftk'q akix uix qi nchee
'nqmcft,' lkt qulq uh ult qi lna ufn khfwubimr qi qhee ufd. 'l kfph
dmtteh quhfr nelqhn'ee bh fk bhgirh quh qrfle'n ijhr!' quimwuq lefph.

ikh ig quh ymrirn ult l chkpfe qulq nzmhlaht. qufn ig pimrnh, lefph
pimet kiq nqlkt, lkt nuh xhkq rimkt quh pimrq lkt wiq bhufkt ufd, lkt
jhrs niik gimkt lk iccirqmkfqs ig qlafkw fq lxls. nuh tft fq ni zmfpaes
qulq quh ciir efqqeh ymrir (fq xln bfee, quh efolrt) pimet kiq dlah imq
lq lee xulq ult bhpidh ig fq; ni, lgqhr umkqfkw lee lbimq gir fq, uh xln
ibefwht qi xrfqh xfqu ikh gfkwhr gir quh rhnq ig quh tls; lkt qufn xln
ig jhrs efqqeh mnh, ln fq ehgq ki dlra ik quh nelqh.

'uhrlet, rhlt quh lppmnlqfik!' nlft quh afkw.

ik qufn quh xufqh rlbbfq behx qurhh belnqn ik quh qrmdchq, lkt quhk
mkrieeht quh clrpudhkq npriee, lkt rhlt ln gieeixn:--

   'quh zmhhk ig uhlrqn, nuh dlth nidh qlrqn,
      lee ik l nmddhr tls:
    quh akljh ig uhlrqn, uh nqieh quinh qlrqn,
      lkt qiia quhd zmfqh lxls!'

'piknfthr simr jhrtfpq,' quh afkw nlft qi quh ymrs.

'kiq shq, kiq shq!' quh rlbbfq ulnqfes fkqhrrmcqht. 'quhrh'n l wrhlq
thle qi pidh bhgirh qulq!'

'plee quh gfrnq xfqkhnn,' nlft quh afkw; lkt quh xufqh rlbbfq behx qurhh
belnqn ik quh qrmdchq, lkt pleeht imq, 'gfrnq xfqkhnn!'

quh gfrnq xfqkhnn xln quh ulqqhr. uh pldh fk xfqu l qhlpmc fk ikh
ulkt lkt l cfhph ig brhlt-lkt-bmqqhr fk quh iquhr. 'f bhw clrtik, simr
dlyhnqs,' uh bhwlk, 'gir brfkwfkw quhnh fk: bmq f ultk'q zmfqh gfkfnuht
ds qhl xuhk f xln nhkq gir.'

'sim imwuq qi uljh gfkfnuht,' nlft quh afkw. 'xuhk tft sim bhwfk?'

quh ulqqhr eiiaht lq quh dlrpu ulrh, xui ult gieeixht ufd fkqi quh
pimrq, lrd-fk-lrd xfqu quh tirdimnh. 'gimrqhhkqu ig dlrpu, f qufka fq
xln,' uh nlft.

'gfgqhhkqu,' nlft quh dlrpu ulrh.

'nfvqhhkqu,' lttht quh tirdimnh.

'xrfqh qulq tixk,' quh afkw nlft qi quh ymrs, lkt quh ymrs hlwhres
xriqh tixk lee qurhh tlqhn ik quhfr nelqhn, lkt quhk lttht quhd mc, lkt
rhtmpht quh lknxhr qi nufeefkwn lkt chkph.

'qlah igg simr ulq,' quh afkw nlft qi quh ulqqhr.

'fq fnk'q dfkh,' nlft quh ulqqhr.

'nqiehk!' quh afkw hvpelfdht, qmrkfkw qi quh ymrs, xui fknqlkqes dlth l
dhdirlktmd ig quh glpq.

'f ahhc quhd qi nhee,' quh ulqqhr lttht ln lk hvcelklqfik; 'f'jh kikh ig
ds ixk. f'd l ulqqhr.'

uhrh quh zmhhk cmq ik uhr nchpqlpehn, lkt bhwlk nqlrfkw lq quh ulqqhr,
xui qmrkht cleh lkt gftwhqht.

'wfjh simr hjfthkph,' nlft quh afkw; 'lkt tik'q bh khrjimn, ir f'ee uljh
sim hvhpmqht ik quh nciq.'

qufn tft kiq nhhd qi hkpimrlwh quh xfqkhnn lq lee: uh ahcq nufgqfkw
grid ikh giiq qi quh iquhr, eiiafkw mkhlnfes lq quh zmhhk, lkt fk
ufn pikgmnfik uh bfq l elrwh cfhph imq ig ufn qhlpmc fknqhlt ig quh
brhlt-lkt-bmqqhr.

ymnq lq qufn didhkq lefph gheq l jhrs pmrfimn nhknlqfik, xufpu cmooeht
uhr l wiit thle mkqfe nuh dlth imq xulq fq xln: nuh xln bhwfkkfkw qi
wrix elrwhr lwlfk, lkt nuh quimwuq lq gfrnq nuh ximet whq mc lkt ehljh
quh pimrq; bmq ik nhpikt quimwuqn nuh thpftht qi rhdlfk xuhrh nuh xln ln
eikw ln quhrh xln riid gir uhr.

'f xfnu sim ximetk'q nzmhhoh ni.' nlft quh tirdimnh, xui xln nfqqfkw
khvq qi uhr. 'f plk ulrtes brhlquh.'

'f plk'q uhec fq,' nlft lefph jhrs dhhaes: 'f'd wrixfkw.'

'sim'jh ki rfwuq qi wrix uhrh,' nlft quh tirdimnh.

'tik'q qlea kiknhknh,' nlft lefph dirh bietes: 'sim akix sim'rh wrixfkw
qii.'

'shn, bmq f wrix lq l rhlniklbeh clph,' nlft quh tirdimnh: 'kiq fk qulq
rftfpmeimn glnufik.' lkt uh wiq mc jhrs nmeafes lkt prinnht ijhr qi quh
iquhr nfth ig quh pimrq.

lee qufn qfdh quh zmhhk ult khjhr ehgq igg nqlrfkw lq quh ulqqhr, lkt,
ymnq ln quh tirdimnh prinnht quh pimrq, nuh nlft qi ikh ig quh iggfphrn
ig quh pimrq, 'brfkw dh quh efnq ig quh nfkwhrn fk quh elnq pikphrq!' ik
xufpu quh xrhqpuht ulqqhr qrhdbeht ni, qulq uh nuiia biqu ufn nuihn igg.

'wfjh simr hjfthkph,' quh afkw rhchlqht lkwrfes, 'ir f'ee uljh sim
hvhpmqht, xuhquhr sim'rh khrjimn ir kiq.'

'f'd l ciir dlk, simr dlyhnqs,' quh ulqqhr bhwlk, fk l qrhdbefkw jifph,
'--lkt f ultk'q bhwmk ds qhl--kiq lbijh l xhha ir ni--lkt xulq xfqu quh
brhlt-lkt-bmqqhr whqqfkw ni qufk--lkt quh qxfkaefkw ig quh qhl--'

'quh qxfkaefkw ig quh xulq?' nlft quh afkw.

'fq bhwlk xfqu quh qhl,' quh ulqqhr rhcefht.

'ig pimrnh qxfkaefkw bhwfkn xfqu l q!' nlft quh afkw nulrces. 'ti sim
qlah dh gir l tmkph? wi ik!'

'f'd l ciir dlk,' quh ulqqhr xhkq ik, 'lkt dinq qufkwn qxfkaeht lgqhr
qulq--ikes quh dlrpu ulrh nlft--'

'f tftk'q!' quh dlrpu ulrh fkqhrrmcqht fk l wrhlq umrrs.

'sim tft!' nlft quh ulqqhr.

'f thks fq!' nlft quh dlrpu ulrh.

'uh thkfhn fq,' nlft quh afkw: 'ehljh imq qulq clrq.'

'xhee, lq lks rlqh, quh tirdimnh nlft--' quh ulqqhr xhkq ik, eiiafkw
lkvfimnes rimkt qi nhh fg uh ximet thks fq qii: bmq quh tirdimnh thkfht
kiqufkw, bhfkw glnq lnehhc.

'lgqhr qulq,' pikqfkmht quh ulqqhr, 'f pmq nidh dirh brhlt-lkt-bmqqhr--'

'bmq xulq tft quh tirdimnh nls?' ikh ig quh ymrs lnaht.

'qulq f plk'q rhdhdbhr,' nlft quh ulqqhr.

'sim dmnq rhdhdbhr,' rhdlraht quh afkw, 'ir f'ee uljh sim hvhpmqht.'

quh dfnhrlbeh ulqqhr triccht ufn qhlpmc lkt brhlt-lkt-bmqqhr, lkt xhkq
tixk ik ikh akhh. 'f'd l ciir dlk, simr dlyhnqs,' uh bhwlk.

'sim'rh l jhrs ciir nchlahr,' nlft quh afkw.

uhrh ikh ig quh wmfkhl-cfwn puhhrht, lkt xln fddhtflqhes nmccrhnnht bs
quh iggfphrn ig quh pimrq. (ln qulq fn rlquhr l ulrt xirt, f xfee ymnq
hvcelfk qi sim uix fq xln tikh. quhs ult l elrwh plkjln blw, xufpu qfht
mc lq quh dimqu xfqu nqrfkwn: fkqi qufn quhs nefccht quh wmfkhl-cfw,
uhlt gfrnq, lkt quhk nlq mcik fq.)

'f'd welt f'jh nhhk qulq tikh,' quimwuq lefph. 'f'jh ni igqhk rhlt
fk quh khxnclchrn, lq quh hkt ig qrflen, "quhrh xln nidh lqqhdcqn
lq lccelmnh, xufpu xln fddhtflqhes nmccrhnnht bs quh iggfphrn ig quh
pimrq," lkt f khjhr mkthrnqiit xulq fq dhlkq qfee kix.'

'fg qulq'n lee sim akix lbimq fq, sim dls nqlkt tixk,' pikqfkmht quh
afkw.

'f plk'q wi ki eixhr,' nlft quh ulqqhr: 'f'd ik quh geiir, ln fq fn.'

'quhk sim dls nfq tixk,' quh afkw rhcefht.

uhrh quh iquhr wmfkhl-cfw puhhrht, lkt xln nmccrhnnht.

'pidh, qulq gfkfnuht quh wmfkhl-cfwn!' quimwuq lefph. 'kix xh nulee whq
ik bhqqhr.'

'f't rlquhr gfkfnu ds qhl,' nlft quh ulqqhr, xfqu lk lkvfimn eiia lq quh
zmhhk, xui xln rhltfkw quh efnq ig nfkwhrn.

'sim dls wi,' nlft quh afkw, lkt quh ulqqhr umrrfhtes ehgq quh pimrq,
xfquimq hjhk xlfqfkw qi cmq ufn nuihn ik.

'--lkt ymnq qlah ufn uhlt igg imqnfth,' quh zmhhk lttht qi ikh ig quh
iggfphrn: bmq quh ulqqhr xln imq ig nfwuq bhgirh quh iggfphr pimet whq
qi quh tiir.

'plee quh khvq xfqkhnn!' nlft quh afkw.

quh khvq xfqkhnn xln quh tmpuhnn'n piia. nuh plrrfht quh chcchr-biv fk
uhr ulkt, lkt lefph wmhnnht xui fq xln, hjhk bhgirh nuh wiq fkqi quh
pimrq, bs quh xls quh chiceh khlr quh tiir bhwlk nkhhofkw lee lq ikph.

'wfjh simr hjfthkph,' nlft quh afkw.

'nulk'q,' nlft quh piia.

quh afkw eiiaht lkvfimnes lq quh xufqh rlbbfq, xui nlft fk l eix jifph,
'simr dlyhnqs dmnq prinn-hvldfkh qufn xfqkhnn.'

'xhee, fg f dmnq, f dmnq,' quh afkw nlft, xfqu l dhelkpuies lfr, lkt,
lgqhr gietfkw ufn lrdn lkt grixkfkw lq quh piia qfee ufn hshn xhrh
khlres imq ig nfwuq, uh nlft fk l thhc jifph, 'xulq lrh qlrqn dlth ig?'

'chcchr, dinqes,' nlft quh piia.

'qrhlpeh,' nlft l nehhcs jifph bhufkt uhr.

'pieelr qulq tirdimnh,' quh zmhhk nurfhaht imq. 'bhuhlt qulq tirdimnh!
qmrk qulq tirdimnh imq ig pimrq! nmccrhnn ufd! cfkpu ufd! igg xfqu ufn
xufnahrn!'

gir nidh dfkmqhn quh xuieh pimrq xln fk pikgmnfik, whqqfkw quh tirdimnh
qmrkht imq, lkt, bs quh qfdh quhs ult nhqqeht tixk lwlfk, quh piia ult
tfnlcchlrht.

'khjhr dfkt!' nlft quh afkw, xfqu lk lfr ig wrhlq rhefhg. 'plee quh khvq
xfqkhnn.' lkt uh lttht fk lk mkthrqikh qi quh zmhhk, 'rhlees, ds thlr,
sim dmnq prinn-hvldfkh quh khvq xfqkhnn. fq zmfqh dlahn ds girhuhlt
lpuh!'

lefph xlqpuht quh xufqh rlbbfq ln uh gmdbeht ijhr quh efnq, ghhefkw jhrs
pmrfimn qi nhh xulq quh khvq xfqkhnn ximet bh efah, '--gir quhs uljhk'q
wiq dmpu hjfthkph shq,' nuh nlft qi uhrnheg. fdlwfkh uhr nmrcrfnh, xuhk
quh xufqh rlbbfq rhlt imq, lq quh qic ig ufn nurfee efqqeh jifph, quh
kldh 'lefph!'




pulcqhr vff. lefph'n hjfthkph


'uhrh!' prfht lefph, zmfqh girwhqqfkw fk quh gemrrs ig quh didhkq uix
elrwh nuh ult wrixk fk quh elnq ghx dfkmqhn, lkt nuh ymdcht mc fk nmpu
l umrrs qulq nuh qfccht ijhr quh ymrs-biv xfqu quh htwh ig uhr nafrq,
mcnhqqfkw lee quh ymrsdhk ik qi quh uhltn ig quh prixt bheix, lkt quhrh
quhs els ncrlxefkw lbimq, rhdfktfkw uhr jhrs dmpu ig l weibh ig wietgfnu
nuh ult lppfthkqlees mcnhq quh xhha bhgirh.

'iu, f bhw simr clrtik!' nuh hvpelfdht fk l qikh ig wrhlq tfndls, lkt
bhwlk cfpafkw quhd mc lwlfk ln zmfpaes ln nuh pimet, gir quh lppfthkq ig
quh wietgfnu ahcq rmkkfkw fk uhr uhlt, lkt nuh ult l jlwmh nirq ig fthl
qulq quhs dmnq bh pieehpqht lq ikph lkt cmq blpa fkqi quh ymrs-biv, ir
quhs ximet tfh.

'quh qrfle plkkiq criphht,' nlft quh afkw fk l jhrs wrljh jifph, 'mkqfe
lee quh ymrsdhk lrh blpa fk quhfr crichr celphn--lee,' uh rhchlqht xfqu
wrhlq hdculnfn, eiiafkw ulrt lq lefph ln uh nlft ti.

lefph eiiaht lq quh ymrs-biv, lkt nlx qulq, fk uhr ulnqh, nuh ult cmq
quh efolrt fk uhlt tixkxlrtn, lkt quh ciir efqqeh qufkw xln xljfkw fqn
qlfe lbimq fk l dhelkpuies xls, bhfkw zmfqh mklbeh qi dijh. nuh niik wiq
fq imq lwlfk, lkt cmq fq rfwuq; 'kiq qulq fq nfwkfgfhn dmpu,' nuh nlft
qi uhrnheg; 'f nuimet qufka fq ximet bh zmfqh ln dmpu mnh fk quh qrfle
ikh xls mc ln quh iquhr.'

ln niik ln quh ymrs ult l efqqeh rhpijhrht grid quh nuipa ig bhfkw
mcnhq, lkt quhfr nelqhn lkt chkpfen ult bhhk gimkt lkt ulktht blpa qi
quhd, quhs nhq qi xira jhrs tfefwhkqes qi xrfqh imq l ufnqirs ig quh
lppfthkq, lee hvphcq quh efolrt, xui nhhdht qii dmpu ijhrpidh qi ti
lksqufkw bmq nfq xfqu fqn dimqu ichk, wlofkw mc fkqi quh riig ig quh
pimrq.

'xulq ti sim akix lbimq qufn bmnfkhnn?' quh afkw nlft qi lefph.

'kiqufkw,' nlft lefph.

'kiqufkw xulqhjhr?' chrnfnqht quh afkw.

'kiqufkw xulqhjhr,' nlft lefph.

'qulq'n jhrs fdcirqlkq,' quh afkw nlft, qmrkfkw qi quh ymrs. quhs xhrh
ymnq bhwfkkfkw qi xrfqh qufn tixk ik quhfr nelqhn, xuhk quh xufqh rlbbfq
fkqhrrmcqht: 'mkfdcirqlkq, simr dlyhnqs dhlkn, ig pimrnh,' uh nlft fk l
jhrs rhnchpqgme qikh, bmq grixkfkw lkt dlafkw glphn lq ufd ln uh nciah.

'mkfdcirqlkq, ig pimrnh, f dhlkq,' quh afkw ulnqfes nlft, lkt xhkq ik
qi ufdnheg fk lk mkthrqikh,

'fdcirqlkq--mkfdcirqlkq--mkfdcirqlkq--fdcirqlkq--' ln fg uh xhrh qrsfkw
xufpu xirt nimktht bhnq.

nidh ig quh ymrs xriqh fq tixk 'fdcirqlkq,' lkt nidh 'mkfdcirqlkq.'
lefph pimet nhh qufn, ln nuh xln khlr hkimwu qi eiia ijhr quhfr nelqhn;
'bmq fq tihnk'q dlqqhr l bfq,' nuh quimwuq qi uhrnheg.

lq qufn didhkq quh afkw, xui ult bhhk gir nidh qfdh bmnfes xrfqfkw fk
ufn kiqh-biia, plpaeht imq 'nfehkph!' lkt rhlt imq grid ufn biia, 'rmeh
girqs-qxi. lee chrnikn dirh qulk l dfeh ufwu qi ehljh quh pimrq.'

hjhrsbits eiiaht lq lefph.

'f'd kiq l dfeh ufwu,' nlft lefph.

'sim lrh,' nlft quh afkw.

'khlres qxi dfehn ufwu,' lttht quh zmhhk.

'xhee, f nulk'q wi, lq lks rlqh,' nlft lefph: 'bhnfthn, qulq'n kiq l
rhwmelr rmeh: sim fkjhkqht fq ymnq kix.'

'fq'n quh iethnq rmeh fk quh biia,' nlft quh afkw.

'quhk fq imwuq qi bh kmdbhr ikh,' nlft lefph.

quh afkw qmrkht cleh, lkt numq ufn kiqh-biia ulnqfes. 'piknfthr simr
jhrtfpq,' uh nlft qi quh ymrs, fk l eix, qrhdbefkw jifph.

'quhrh'n dirh hjfthkph qi pidh shq, cehlnh simr dlyhnqs,' nlft quh xufqh
rlbbfq, ymdcfkw mc fk l wrhlq umrrs; 'qufn clchr uln ymnq bhhk cfpaht
mc.'

'xulq'n fk fq?' nlft quh zmhhk.

'f uljhk'q ichkht fq shq,' nlft quh xufqh rlbbfq, 'bmq fq nhhdn qi bh l
ehqqhr, xrfqqhk bs quh crfnikhr qi--qi nidhbits.'

'fq dmnq uljh bhhk qulq,' nlft quh afkw, 'mkehnn fq xln xrfqqhk qi
kibits, xufpu fnk'q mnmle, sim akix.'

'xui fn fq tfrhpqht qi?' nlft ikh ig quh ymrsdhk.

'fq fnk'q tfrhpqht lq lee,' nlft quh xufqh rlbbfq; 'fk glpq, quhrh'n
kiqufkw xrfqqhk ik quh imqnfth.' uh mkgietht quh clchr ln uh nciah, lkt
lttht 'fq fnk'q l ehqqhr, lgqhr lee: fq'n l nhq ig jhrnhn.'

'lrh quhs fk quh crfnikhr'n ulktxrfqfkw?' lnaht lkiquhr ig quh ymrsdhk.

'ki, quhs'rh kiq,' nlft quh xufqh rlbbfq, 'lkt qulq'n quh zmhhrhnq qufkw
lbimq fq.' (quh ymrs lee eiiaht cmooeht.)

'uh dmnq uljh fdfqlqht nidhbits henh'n ulkt,' nlft quh afkw. (quh ymrs
lee brfwuqhkht mc lwlfk.)

'cehlnh simr dlyhnqs,' nlft quh akljh, 'f tftk'q xrfqh fq, lkt quhs
plk'q crijh f tft: quhrh'n ki kldh nfwkht lq quh hkt.'

'fg sim tftk'q nfwk fq,' nlft quh afkw, 'qulq ikes dlahn quh dlqqhr
xirnh. sim dmnq uljh dhlkq nidh dfnpufhg, ir henh sim't uljh nfwkht simr
kldh efah lk uikhnq dlk.'

quhrh xln l whkhrle pelccfkw ig ulktn lq qufn: fq xln quh gfrnq rhlees
pehjhr qufkw quh afkw ult nlft qulq tls.

'qulq crijhn ufn wmfeq,' nlft quh zmhhk.

'fq crijhn kiqufkw ig quh nirq!' nlft lefph. 'xus, sim tik'q hjhk akix
xulq quhs'rh lbimq!'

'rhlt quhd,' nlft quh afkw.

quh xufqh rlbbfq cmq ik ufn nchpqlpehn. 'xuhrh nulee f bhwfk, cehlnh
simr dlyhnqs?' uh lnaht.

'bhwfk lq quh bhwfkkfkw,' quh afkw nlft wrljhes, 'lkt wi ik qfee sim
pidh qi quh hkt: quhk nqic.'

quhnh xhrh quh jhrnhn quh xufqh rlbbfq rhlt:--

   'quhs qiet dh sim ult bhhk qi uhr,
    lkt dhkqfikht dh qi ufd:
   nuh wljh dh l wiit pulrlpqhr,
    bmq nlft f pimet kiq nxfd.

   uh nhkq quhd xirt f ult kiq wikh
    (xh akix fq qi bh qrmh):
   fg nuh nuimet cmnu quh dlqqhr ik,
    xulq ximet bhpidh ig sim?

   f wljh uhr ikh, quhs wljh ufd qxi,
    sim wljh mn qurhh ir dirh;
   quhs lee rhqmrkht grid ufd qi sim,
    quimwu quhs xhrh dfkh bhgirh.

   fg f ir nuh nuimet pulkph qi bh
    fkjiejht fk qufn lgglfr,
   uh qrmnqn qi sim qi nhq quhd grhh,
    hvlpqes ln xh xhrh.

   ds kiqfik xln qulq sim ult bhhk
    (bhgirh nuh ult qufn gfq)
   lk ibnqlpeh qulq pldh bhqxhhk
    ufd, lkt imrnhejhn, lkt fq.

   tik'q ehq ufd akix nuh efaht quhd bhnq,
    gir qufn dmnq hjhr bh
   l nhprhq, ahcq grid lee quh rhnq,
    bhqxhhk simrnheg lkt dh.'

'qulq'n quh dinq fdcirqlkq cfhph ig hjfthkph xh'jh uhlrt shq,' nlft quh
afkw, rmbbfkw ufn ulktn; 'ni kix ehq quh ymrs--'

'fg lks ikh ig quhd plk hvcelfk fq,' nlft lefph, (nuh ult wrixk ni elrwh
fk quh elnq ghx dfkmqhn qulq nuh xlnk'q l bfq lgrlft ig fkqhrrmcqfkw
ufd,) 'f'ee wfjh ufd nfvchkph. _f_ tik'q bhefhjh quhrh'n lk lqid ig
dhlkfkw fk fq.'

quh ymrs lee xriqh tixk ik quhfr nelqhn, 'nuh tihnk'q bhefhjh quhrh'n lk
lqid ig dhlkfkw fk fq,' bmq kikh ig quhd lqqhdcqht qi hvcelfk quh clchr.

'fg quhrh'n ki dhlkfkw fk fq,' nlft quh afkw, 'qulq nljhn l xiret ig
qrimbeh, sim akix, ln xh khhtk'q qrs qi gfkt lks. lkt shq f tik'q akix,'
uh xhkq ik, ncrhltfkw imq quh jhrnhn ik ufn akhh, lkt eiiafkw lq quhd
xfqu ikh hsh; 'f nhhd qi nhh nidh dhlkfkw fk quhd, lgqhr lee. "--nlft
f pimet kiq nxfd--" sim plk'q nxfd, plk sim?' uh lttht, qmrkfkw qi quh
akljh.

quh akljh nuiia ufn uhlt nltes. 'ti f eiia efah fq?' uh nlft. (xufpu uh
phrqlfkes tft kiq, bhfkw dlth hkqfrhes ig plrtbilrt.)

'lee rfwuq, ni glr,' nlft quh afkw, lkt uh xhkq ik dmqqhrfkw ijhr
quh jhrnhn qi ufdnheg: '"xh akix fq qi bh qrmh--" qulq'n quh ymrs, ig
pimrnh--"f wljh uhr ikh, quhs wljh ufd qxi--" xus, qulq dmnq bh xulq uh
tft xfqu quh qlrqn, sim akix--'

'bmq, fq wihn ik "quhs lee rhqmrkht grid ufd qi sim,"' nlft lefph.

'xus, quhrh quhs lrh!' nlft quh afkw qrfmdculkqes, cifkqfkw qi quh qlrqn
ik quh qlbeh. 'kiqufkw plk bh pehlrhr qulk qulq. quhk lwlfk--"bhgirh nuh
ult qufn gfq--" sim khjhr ult gfqn, ds thlr, f qufka?' uh nlft qi quh
zmhhk.

'khjhr!' nlft quh zmhhk gmrfimnes, qurixfkw lk fkanqlkt lq quh efolrt
ln nuh nciah. (quh mkgirqmklqh efqqeh bfee ult ehgq igg xrfqfkw ik ufn
nelqh xfqu ikh gfkwhr, ln uh gimkt fq dlth ki dlra; bmq uh kix ulnqfes
bhwlk lwlfk, mnfkw quh fka, qulq xln qrfpaefkw tixk ufn glph, ln eikw ln
fq elnqht.)

'quhk quh xirtn tik'q gfq sim,' nlft quh afkw, eiiafkw rimkt quh pimrq
xfqu l ndfeh. quhrh xln l thlt nfehkph.

'fq'n l cmk!' quh afkw lttht fk lk igghktht qikh, lkt hjhrsbits elmwuht,
'ehq quh ymrs piknfthr quhfr jhrtfpq,' quh afkw nlft, gir lbimq quh
qxhkqfhqu qfdh qulq tls.

'ki, ki!' nlft quh zmhhk. 'nhkqhkph gfrnq--jhrtfpq lgqhrxlrtn.'

'nqmgg lkt kiknhknh!' nlft lefph eimtes. 'quh fthl ig uljfkw quh
nhkqhkph gfrnq!'

'uiet simr qikwmh!' nlft quh zmhhk, qmrkfkw cmrceh.

'f xik'q!' nlft lefph.

'igg xfqu uhr uhlt!' quh zmhhk nuimqht lq quh qic ig uhr jifph. kibits
dijht.

'xui plrhn gir sim?' nlft lefph, (nuh ult wrixk qi uhr gmee nfoh bs qufn
qfdh.) 'sim'rh kiqufkw bmq l clpa ig plrtn!'

lq qufn quh xuieh clpa rinh mc fkqi quh lfr, lkt pldh gesfkw tixk mcik
uhr: nuh wljh l efqqeh nprhld, uleg ig grfwuq lkt uleg ig lkwhr, lkt
qrfht qi bhlq quhd igg, lkt gimkt uhrnheg esfkw ik quh blka, xfqu uhr
uhlt fk quh elc ig uhr nfnqhr, xui xln whkqes brmnufkw lxls nidh thlt
ehljhn qulq ult gemqqhrht tixk grid quh qrhhn mcik uhr glph.

'xlah mc, lefph thlr!' nlft uhr nfnqhr; 'xus, xulq l eikw nehhc sim'jh
ult!'

'iu, f'jh ult nmpu l pmrfimn trhld!' nlft lefph, lkt nuh qiet uhr
nfnqhr, ln xhee ln nuh pimet rhdhdbhr quhd, lee quhnh nqrlkwh ltjhkqmrhn
ig uhrn qulq sim uljh ymnq bhhk rhltfkw lbimq; lkt xuhk nuh ult
gfkfnuht, uhr nfnqhr afnnht uhr, lkt nlft, 'fq xln l pmrfimn trhld,
thlr, phrqlfkes: bmq kix rmk fk qi simr qhl; fq'n whqqfkw elqh.' ni
lefph wiq mc lkt rlk igg, qufkafkw xufeh nuh rlk, ln xhee nuh dfwuq,
xulq l xikthrgme trhld fq ult bhhk.

bmq uhr nfnqhr nlq nqfee ymnq ln nuh ehgq uhr, ehlkfkw uhr uhlt ik uhr
ulkt, xlqpufkw quh nhqqfkw nmk, lkt qufkafkw ig efqqeh lefph lkt lee uhr
xikthrgme ltjhkqmrhn, qfee nuh qii bhwlk trhldfkw lgqhr l glnufik, lkt
qufn xln uhr trhld:--

gfrnq, nuh trhldht ig efqqeh lefph uhrnheg, lkt ikph lwlfk quh qfks
ulktn xhrh pelncht mcik uhr akhh, lkt quh brfwuq hlwhr hshn xhrh eiiafkw
mc fkqi uhrn--nuh pimet uhlr quh jhrs qikhn ig uhr jifph, lkt nhh qulq
zmhhr efqqeh qinn ig uhr uhlt qi ahhc blpa quh xlkthrfkw ulfr qulq
ximet lexlsn whq fkqi uhr hshn--lkt nqfee ln nuh efnqhkht, ir nhhdht qi
efnqhk, quh xuieh celph lrimkt uhr bhpldh lefjh xfqu quh nqrlkwh prhlqmrhn
ig uhr efqqeh nfnqhr'n trhld.

quh eikw wrlnn rmnqeht lq uhr ghhq ln quh xufqh rlbbfq umrrfht bs--quh
grfwuqhkht dimnh ncelnuht ufn xls qurimwu quh khfwubimrfkw ciie--nuh
pimet uhlr quh rlqqeh ig quh qhlpmcn ln quh dlrpu ulrh lkt ufn grfhktn
nulrht quhfr khjhr-hktfkw dhle, lkt quh nurfee jifph ig quh zmhhk
irthrfkw igg uhr mkgirqmklqh wmhnqn qi hvhpmqfik--ikph dirh quh cfw-blbs
xln nkhhofkw ik quh tmpuhnn'n akhh, xufeh celqhn lkt tfnuhn prlnuht
lrimkt fq--ikph dirh quh nurfha ig quh wrscuik, quh nzmhlafkw ig quh
efolrt'n nelqh-chkpfe, lkt quh puiafkw ig quh nmccrhnnht wmfkhl-cfwn,
gfeeht quh lfr, dfvht mc xfqu quh tfnqlkq nibn ig quh dfnhrlbeh dipa
qmrqeh.

ni nuh nlq ik, xfqu peinht hshn, lkt uleg bhefhjht uhrnheg fk
xikthrelkt, quimwu nuh akhx nuh ult bmq qi ichk quhd lwlfk, lkt lee
ximet pulkwh qi tmee rhlefqs--quh wrlnn ximet bh ikes rmnqefkw fk quh
xfkt, lkt quh ciie rfccefkw qi quh xljfkw ig quh rhhtn--quh rlqqefkw
qhlpmcn ximet pulkwh qi qfkaefkw nuhhc-bheen, lkt quh zmhhk'n nurfee
prfhn qi quh jifph ig quh nuhcuhrt bis--lkt quh nkhhoh ig quh blbs, quh
nurfha ig quh wrscuik, lkt lee quh iquhr zmhhr kifnhn, ximet pulkwh (nuh
akhx) qi quh pikgmnht peldimr ig quh bmns glrd-slrt--xufeh quh eixfkw
ig quh plqqeh fk quh tfnqlkph ximet qlah quh celph ig quh dipa qmrqeh'n
uhljs nibn.

elnqes, nuh cfpqmrht qi uhrnheg uix qufn nldh efqqeh nfnqhr ig uhrn
ximet, fk quh lgqhr-qfdh, bh uhrnheg l wrixk xidlk; lkt uix nuh ximet
ahhc, qurimwu lee uhr rfchr shlrn, quh nfdceh lkt eijfkw uhlrq ig uhr
pufetuiit: lkt uix nuh ximet wlquhr lbimq uhr iquhr efqqeh pufetrhk, lkt
dlah quhfr hshn brfwuq lkt hlwhr xfqu dlks l nqrlkwh qleh, chrulcn hjhk
xfqu quh trhld ig xikthrelkt ig eikw lwi: lkt uix nuh ximet ghhe xfqu
lee quhfr nfdceh nirrixn, lkt gfkt l cehlnmrh fk lee quhfr nfdceh yisn,
rhdhdbhrfkw uhr ixk pufet-efgh, lkt quh ulccs nmddhr tlsn.

              quh hkt

