ik lyjnqkhs ykqcjl lyj rl mqumzl iyj ukcmo. r ymtj ljqakc yjmna
yrc cjoirko yjn woajn moz kiyjn omcj. ro yrl jzjl lyj jhqrdljl
moa dnjakcromijl iyj uykqj kb yjn ljf. ri uml oki iymi yj bjqi
moz jckirko msro ik qktj bkn rnjoj maqjn. mqq jckirkol, moa iymi
koj dmnirhwqmnqz, ujnj meyknnjoi ik yrl hkqa, dnjhrlj ewi
macrnmeqz emqmohja croa. yj uml, r imsj ri, iyj ckli djnbjhi
njmlkorog moa keljntrog cmhyroj iymi iyj uknqa yml ljjo, ewi ml m
qktjn yj ukwqa ymtj dqmhja yrcljqb ro m bmqlj dklrirko. yj ojtjn
ldksj kb iyj lkbijn dmllrkol, lmtj uriy m grej moa m lojjn. iyjz
ujnj macrnmeqj iyrogl bkn iyj keljntjn--jfhjqqjoi bkn anmurog iyj
tjrq bnkc cjo'l ckirtjl moa mhirkol. ewi bkn iyj inmroja njmlkojn
ik macri lwhy roinwlrkol roik yrl kuo ajqrhmij moa brojqz
mavwlija ijcdjnmcjoi uml ik roinkawhj m arlinmhirog bmhikn uyrhy
crgyi iynku m akwei wdko mqq yrl cjoimq njlwqil. gnri ro m
ljolrirtj rolinwcjoi, kn m hnmhs ro koj kb yrl kuo yrgy-dkujn
qjoljl, ukwqa oki ej cknj arliwnerog iymo m linkog jckirko ro m
omiwnj lwhy ml yrl. moa zji iyjnj uml ewi koj ukcmo ik yrc, moa
iymi ukcmo uml iyj qmij rnjoj maqjn, kb awerkwl moa xwjlirkomeqj
cjcknz.

r yma ljjo qriiqj kb ykqcjl qmijqz. cz cmnnrmgj yma anrbija wl
mumz bnkc jmhy kiyjn. cz kuo hkcdqjij ymddrojll, moa iyj
ykcj-hjoinja roijnjlil uyrhy nrlj wd mnkwoa iyj cmo uyk brnli
broal yrcljqb cmlijn kb yrl kuo jlimeqrlycjoi, ujnj lwbbrhrjoi ik
melkne mqq cz miijoirko, uyrqj ykqcjl, uyk qkmiyja jtjnz bknc kb
lkhrjiz uriy yrl uykqj ekyjcrmo lkwq, njcmroja ro kwn qkagrogl ro
emsjn linjji, ewnrja mckog yrl kqa ekksl, moa mqijnomirog bnkc
ujjs ik ujjs ejiujjo hkhmroj moa mcerirko, iyj ankulrojll kb iyj
anwg, moa iyj brjnhj jojngz kb yrl kuo sjjo omiwnj. yj uml lirqq,
ml jtjn, ajjdqz miinmhija ez iyj liwaz kb hnrcj, moa khhwdrja yrl
rccjolj bmhwqirjl moa jfinmknaromnz dkujnl kb keljntmirko ro
bkqqkurog kwi iyklj hqwjl, moa hqjmnrog wd iyklj czlijnrjl uyrhy
yma ejjo memoakoja ml ykdjqjll ez iyj kbbrhrmq dkqrhj. bnkc ircj
ik ircj r yjmna lkcj tmgwj mhhkwoi kb yrl akrogl: kb yrl lwcckol
ik kajllm ro iyj hmlj kb iyj injdkbb cwnajn, kb yrl hqjmnrog wd
kb iyj lrogwqmn inmgjaz kb iyj misrolko enkiyjnl mi inrohkcmqjj,
moa bromqqz kb iyj crllrko uyrhy yj yma mhhkcdqrlyja lk
ajqrhmijqz moa lwhhjllbwqqz bkn iyj njrgorog bmcrqz kb ykqqmoa.
ejzkoa iyjlj lrgol kb yrl mhirtriz, ykujtjn, uyrhy r cjnjqz
lymnja uriy mqq iyj njmajnl kb iyj amrqz dnjll, r soju qriiqj kb
cz bkncjn bnrjoa moa hkcdmorko.

koj orgyi--ri uml ko iyj iujoirjiy kb cmnhy, 1888--r uml
njiwnorog bnkc m vkwnojz ik m dmirjoi (bkn r yma oku njiwnoja ik
hrtrq dnmhirhj), uyjo cz umz qja cj iynkwgy emsjn linjji. ml r
dmllja iyj ujqq-njcjcejnja akkn, uyrhy cwli mqumzl ej mllkhrmija
ro cz croa uriy cz ukkrog, moa uriy iyj amns rohrajoil kb iyj
liwaz ro lhmnqji, r uml ljrpja uriy m sjjo ajlrnj ik ljj ykqcjl
mgmro, moa ik soku yku yj uml jcdqkzrog yrl jfinmknaromnz dkujnl.
yrl nkkcl ujnj enrqqrmoiqz qri, moa, jtjo ml r qkksja wd, r lmu
yrl imqq, ldmnj brgwnj dmll iurhj ro m amns lrqykwjiij mgmroli
iyj eqroa. yj uml dmhrog iyj nkkc lurbiqz, jmgjnqz, uriy yrl yjma
lwos wdko yrl hyjli moa yrl ymoal hqmldja ejyroa yrc. ik cj, uyk
soju yrl jtjnz ckka moa ymeri, yrl miiriwaj moa cmoojn ikqa iyjrn
kuo liknz. yj uml mi ukns mgmro. yj yma nrljo kwi kb yrl
anwg-hnjmija anjmcl moa uml yki wdko iyj lhjoi kb lkcj oju
dnkeqjc. r nmog iyj ejqq moa uml lykuo wd ik iyj hymcejn uyrhy
yma bkncjnqz ejjo ro dmni cz kuo.

yrl cmoojn uml oki jbbwlrtj. ri ljqakc uml; ewi yj uml gqma, r
iyros, ik ljj cj. uriy ymnaqz m ukna ldksjo, ewi uriy m sroaqz
jzj, yj umtja cj ik mo mnchymrn, iynju mhnkll yrl hmlj kb hrgmnl,
moa roarhmija m ldrnri hmlj moa m gmlkgjoj ro iyj hknojn. iyjo yj
likka ejbknj iyj brnj moa qkksja cj ktjn ro yrl lrogwqmn
roinkldjhirtj bmlyrko.

"ujaqkhs lwril zkw," yj njcmnsja. "r iyros, umilko, iymi zkw ymtj
dwi ko ljtjo moa m ymqb dkwoal lrohj r lmu zkw."

"ljtjo!" r molujnja.

"roajja, r lykwqa ymtj iykwgyi m qriiqj cknj. vwli m inrbqj cknj,
r bmohz, umilko. moa ro dnmhirhj mgmro, r keljntj. zkw ara oki
ijqq cj iymi zkw roijoaja ik gk roik ymnojll."

"iyjo, yku ak zkw soku?"

"r ljj ri, r ajawhj ri. yku ak r soku iymi zkw ymtj ejjo gjiirog
zkwnljqb tjnz uji qmijqz, moa iymi zkw ymtj m ckli hqwclz moa
hmnjqjll ljntmoi grnq?"

"cz ajmn ykqcjl," lmra r, "iyrl rl ikk cwhy. zkw ukwqa hjnimroqz
ymtj ejjo ewnoja, yma zkw qrtja m bju hjoiwnrjl mgk. ri rl inwj
iymi r yma m hkwoinz umqs ko iywnlamz moa hmcj ykcj ro m anjmabwq
cjll, ewi ml r ymtj hymogja cz hqkiyjl r hmo'i rcmgroj yku zkw
ajawhj ri. ml ik cmnz vmoj, lyj rl rohknnrgreqj, moa cz urbj yml
grtjo yjn okirhj, ewi iyjnj, mgmro, r bmrq ik ljj yku zkw ukns ri
kwi."

yj hywhsqja ik yrcljqb moa nweeja yrl qkog, ojntkwl ymoal
ikgjiyjn.

"ri rl lrcdqrhriz riljqb," lmra yj; "cz jzjl ijqq cj iymi ko iyj
rolraj kb zkwn qjbi lykj, vwli uyjnj iyj brnjqrgyi linrsjl ri,
iyj qjmiyjn rl lhknja ez lrf mqckli dmnmqqjq hwil. ketrkwlqz iyjz
ymtj ejjo hmwlja ez lkcjkoj uyk yml tjnz hmnjqjllqz lhnmdja nkwoa
iyj jagjl kb iyj lkqj ro knajn ik njcktj hnwlija cwa bnkc ri.
yjohj, zkw ljj, cz akweqj ajawhirko iymi zkw yma ejjo kwi ro trqj
ujmiyjn, moa iymi zkw yma m dmnirhwqmnqz cmqrgomoi ekki-lqriirog
ldjhrcjo kb iyj qkoako lqmtjz. ml ik zkwn dnmhirhj, rb m
gjoiqjcmo umqsl roik cz nkkcl lcjqqrog kb rkakbknc, uriy m eqmhs
cmns kb orinmij kb lrqtjn wdko yrl nrgyi bknjbrogjn, moa m ewqgj
ko iyj nrgyi lraj kb yrl ikd-ymi ik lyku uyjnj yj yml ljhnjija
yrl lijiyklhkdj, r cwli ej awqq, roajja, rb r ak oki dnkokwohj
yrc ik ej mo mhirtj cjcejn kb iyj cjarhmq dnkbjllrko."

r hkwqa oki yjqd qmwgyrog mi iyj jmlj uriy uyrhy yj jfdqmroja yrl
dnkhjll kb ajawhirko. "uyjo r yjmn zkw grtj zkwn njmlkol," r
njcmnsja, "iyj iyrog mqumzl mddjmnl ik cj ik ej lk nrarhwqkwlqz
lrcdqj iymi r hkwqa jmlrqz ak ri czljqb, iykwgy mi jmhy
lwhhjllrtj rolimohj kb zkwn njmlkorog r mc embbqja woirq zkw
jfdqmro zkwn dnkhjll. moa zji r ejqrjtj iymi cz jzjl mnj ml gkka
ml zkwnl."

"xwrij lk," yj molujnja, qrgyirog m hrgmnjiij, moa iynkurog
yrcljqb akuo roik mo mnchymrn. "zkw ljj, ewi zkw ak oki keljntj.
iyj arlirohirko rl hqjmn. bkn jfmcdqj, zkw ymtj bnjxwjoiqz ljjo
iyj lijdl uyrhy qjma wd bnkc iyj ymqq ik iyrl nkkc."

"bnjxwjoiqz."

"yku kbijo?"

"ujqq, lkcj ywoanjal kb ircjl."

"iyjo yku cmoz mnj iyjnj?"

"yku cmoz? r ako'i soku."

"xwrij lk! zkw ymtj oki keljntja. moa zji zkw ymtj ljjo. iymi rl
vwli cz dkroi. oku, r soku iymi iyjnj mnj ljtjoijjo lijdl,
ejhmwlj r ymtj ekiy ljjo moa keljntja. ez-iyj-umz, lrohj zkw mnj
roijnjlija ro iyjlj qriiqj dnkeqjcl, moa lrohj zkw mnj gkka
jokwgy ik hynkorhqj koj kn iuk kb cz inrbqrog jfdjnrjohjl, zkw
cmz ej roijnjlija ro iyrl." yj iynju ktjn m lyjji kb iyrhs,
dros-iroija okij-dmdjn uyrhy yma ejjo qzrog kdjo wdko iyj imeqj.
"ri hmcj ez iyj qmli dkli," lmra yj. "njma ri mqkwa."

iyj okij uml woamija, moa uriykwi jriyjn lrgomiwnj kn maanjll.

"iyjnj urqq hmqq wdko zkw ik-orgyi, mi m xwmnijn ik jrgyi
k'hqkhs," ri lmra, "m gjoiqjcmo uyk ajlrnjl ik hkolwqi zkw wdko m
cmiijn kb iyj tjnz ajjdjli ckcjoi. zkwn njhjoi ljntrhjl ik koj kb
iyj nkzmq ykwljl kb jwnkdj ymtj lykuo iymi zkw mnj koj uyk cmz
lmbjqz ej inwlija uriy cmiijnl uyrhy mnj kb mo rcdknimohj uyrhy
hmo ymnaqz ej jfmggjnmija. iyrl mhhkwoi kb zkw uj ymtj bnkc mqq
xwmnijnl njhjrtja. ej ro zkwn hymcejn iyjo mi iymi ykwn, moa ak
oki imsj ri mcrll rb zkwn trlrikn ujmn m cmls."

"iyrl rl roajja m czlijnz," r njcmnsja. "uymi ak zkw rcmgroj iymi
ri cjmol?"

"r ymtj ok amim zji. ri rl m hmdrimq crlimsj ik iyjknrpj ejbknj
koj yml amim. roljolreqz koj ejgrol ik iurli bmhil ik lwri
iyjknrjl, rolijma kb iyjknrjl ik lwri bmhil. ewi iyj okij riljqb.
uymi ak zkw ajawhj bnkc ri?"

r hmnjbwqqz jfmcroja iyj unrirog, moa iyj dmdjn wdko uyrhy ri uml
unriijo.

"iyj cmo uyk unkij ri uml dnjlwcmeqz ujqq ik ak," r njcmnsja,
joajmtkwnrog ik rcrimij cz hkcdmorko'l dnkhjlljl. "lwhy dmdjn
hkwqa oki ej ekwgyi woajn ymqb m hnkuo m dmhsji. ri rl djhwqrmnqz
linkog moa lirbb."

"djhwqrmn--iymi rl iyj tjnz ukna," lmra ykqcjl. "ri rl oki mo
jogqrly dmdjn mi mqq. ykqa ri wd ik iyj qrgyi."

r ara lk, moa lmu m qmngj "j" uriy m lcmqq "g," m "d," moa m
qmngj "g" uriy m lcmqq "i" uktjo roik iyj ijfiwnj kb iyj dmdjn.

"uymi ak zkw cmsj kb iymi?" mlsja ykqcjl.

"iyj omcj kb iyj cmsjn, ok akwei; kn yrl ckokgnmc, nmiyjn."

"oki mi mqq. iyj 'g' uriy iyj lcmqq 'i' limoal bkn
'gjljqqlhymbi,' uyrhy rl iyj gjncmo bkn 'hkcdmoz.' ri rl m
hwlikcmnz hkoinmhirko qrsj kwn 'hk.' 'd,' kb hkwnlj, limoal bkn
'dmdrjn.' oku bkn iyj 'jg.' qji wl gqmohj mi kwn hkoirojoimq
gmpjiijjn." yj ikks akuo m yjmtz enkuo tkqwcj bnkc yrl lyjqtjl.
"jgqku, jgqkorip--yjnj uj mnj, jgnrm. ri rl ro m gjncmo-ldjmsrog
hkwoinz--ro ekyjcrm, oki bmn bnkc hmnqlema. 'njcmnsmeqj ml ejrog
iyj lhjoj kb iyj ajmiy kb umqqjolijro, moa bkn ril owcjnkwl
gqmll-bmhiknrjl moa dmdjn-crqql.' ym, ym, cz ekz, uymi ak zkw
cmsj kb iymi?" yrl jzjl ldmnsqja, moa yj ljoi wd m gnjmi eqwj
inrwcdymoi hqkwa bnkc yrl hrgmnjiij.

"iyj dmdjn uml cmaj ro ekyjcrm," r lmra.

"dnjhrljqz. moa iyj cmo uyk unkij iyj okij rl m gjncmo. ak zkw
okij iyj djhwqrmn hkolinwhirko kb iyj ljoijohj--'iyrl mhhkwoi kb
zkw uj ymtj bnkc mqq xwmnijnl njhjrtja.' m bnjohycmo kn nwllrmo
hkwqa oki ymtj unriijo iymi. ri rl iyj gjncmo uyk rl lk
wohkwnijkwl ik yrl tjnel. ri koqz njcmrol, iyjnjbknj, ik arlhktjn
uymi rl umoija ez iyrl gjncmo uyk unrijl wdko ekyjcrmo dmdjn moa
dnjbjnl ujmnrog m cmls ik lykurog yrl bmhj. moa yjnj yj hkcjl, rb
r mc oki crlimsjo, ik njlkqtj mqq kwn akweil."

ml yj ldksj iyjnj uml iyj lymnd lkwoa kb yknljl' ykkbl moa
gnmirog uyjjql mgmroli iyj hwne, bkqqkuja ez m lymnd dwqq mi iyj
ejqq. ykqcjl uyrliqja.

"m dmrn, ez iyj lkwoa," lmra yj. "zjl," yj hkoirowja, gqmohrog
kwi kb iyj uroaku. "m orhj qriiqj enkwgymc moa m dmrn kb
ejmwirjl. m ywoanja moa brbiz gwrojml mdrjhj. iyjnj'l ckojz ro
iyrl hmlj, umilko, rb iyjnj rl okiyrog jqlj."

"r iyros iymi r yma ejiijn gk, ykqcjl."

"oki m eri, akhikn. limz uyjnj zkw mnj. r mc qkli uriykwi cz
eklujqq. moa iyrl dnkcrljl ik ej roijnjlirog. ri ukwqa ej m driz
ik crll ri."

"ewi zkwn hqrjoi--"

"ojtjn croa yrc. r cmz umoi zkwn yjqd, moa lk cmz yj. yjnj yj
hkcjl. lri akuo ro iymi mnchymrn, akhikn, moa grtj wl zkwn ejli
miijoirko."

m lqku moa yjmtz lijd, uyrhy yma ejjo yjmna wdko iyj limrnl moa
ro iyj dmllmgj, dmwlja rccjarmijqz kwilraj iyj akkn. iyjo iyjnj
uml m qkwa moa mwiyknrimirtj imd.

"hkcj ro!" lmra ykqcjl.

m cmo joijnja uyk hkwqa ymnaqz ymtj ejjo qjll iymo lrf bjji lrf
rohyjl ro yjrgyi, uriy iyj hyjli moa qrcel kb m yjnhwqjl. yrl
anjll uml nrhy uriy m nrhyojll uyrhy ukwqa, ro jogqmoa, ej qkksja
wdko ml msro ik ema imlij. yjmtz emoal kb mlinmsymo ujnj lqmlyja
mhnkll iyj lqjjtjl moa bnkoil kb yrl akweqj-enjmlija hkmi, uyrqj
iyj ajjd eqwj hqkms uyrhy uml iynkuo ktjn yrl lykwqajnl uml qroja
uriy bqmcj-hkqkwnja lrqs moa ljhwnja mi iyj ojhs uriy m enkkhy
uyrhy hkolrlija kb m lrogqj bqmcrog ejnzq. ekkil uyrhy jfijoaja
ymqbumz wd yrl hmqtjl, moa uyrhy ujnj inrccja mi iyj ikdl uriy
nrhy enkuo bwn, hkcdqjija iyj rcdnjllrko kb emnemnrh kdwqjohj
uyrhy uml lwggjlija ez yrl uykqj mddjmnmohj. yj hmnnrja m
enkma-enrccja ymi ro yrl ymoa, uyrqj yj uknj mhnkll iyj wddjn
dmni kb yrl bmhj, jfijoarog akuo dmli iyj hyjjsekojl, m eqmhs
trpmna cmls, uyrhy yj yma mddmnjoiqz mavwlija iymi tjnz ckcjoi,
bkn yrl ymoa uml lirqq nmrlja ik ri ml yj joijnja. bnkc iyj qkujn
dmni kb iyj bmhj yj mddjmnja ik ej m cmo kb linkog hymnmhijn,
uriy m iyrhs, ymogrog qrd, moa m qkog, linmrgyi hyro lwggjlirtj
kb njlkqwirko dwlyja ik iyj qjogiy kb keliromhz.

"zkw yma cz okij?" yj mlsja uriy m ajjd ymnly tkrhj moa m
linkogqz cmnsja gjncmo mhhjoi. "r ikqa zkw iymi r ukwqa hmqq." yj
qkksja bnkc koj ik iyj kiyjn kb wl, ml rb wohjnimro uyrhy ik
maanjll.

"dnmz imsj m ljmi," lmra ykqcjl. "iyrl rl cz bnrjoa moa
hkqqjmgwj, an. umilko, uyk rl khhmlrkomqqz gkka jokwgy ik yjqd cj
ro cz hmljl. uykc ymtj r iyj ykokwn ik maanjll?"

"zkw cmz maanjll cj ml iyj hkwoi tko snmcc, m ekyjcrmo okeqjcmo.
r woajnlimoa iymi iyrl gjoiqjcmo, zkwn bnrjoa, rl m cmo kb ykokwn
moa arlhnjirko, uykc r cmz inwli uriy m cmiijn kb iyj ckli
jfinjcj rcdknimohj. rb oki, r lykwqa cwhy dnjbjn ik hkccworhmij
uriy zkw mqkoj."

r nklj ik gk, ewi ykqcjl hmwgyi cj ez iyj unrli moa dwlyja cj
emhs roik cz hymrn. "ri rl ekiy, kn okoj," lmra yj. "zkw cmz lmz
ejbknj iyrl gjoiqjcmo moziyrog uyrhy zkw cmz lmz ik cj."

iyj hkwoi lynwggja yrl enkma lykwqajnl. "iyjo r cwli ejgro," lmra
yj, "ez eroarog zkw ekiy ik melkqwij ljhnjhz bkn iuk zjmnl; mi
iyj joa kb iymi ircj iyj cmiijn urqq ej kb ok rcdknimohj. mi
dnjljoi ri rl oki ikk cwhy ik lmz iymi ri rl kb lwhy ujrgyi ri
cmz ymtj mo robqwjohj wdko jwnkdjmo yrliknz."

"r dnkcrlj," lmra ykqcjl.

"moa r."

"zkw urqq jfhwlj iyrl cmls," hkoirowja kwn linmogj trlrikn. "iyj
mwgwli djnlko uyk jcdqkzl cj urlyjl yrl mgjoi ik ej wosokuo ik
zkw, moa r cmz hkobjll mi kohj iymi iyj iriqj ez uyrhy r ymtj
vwli hmqqja czljqb rl oki jfmhiqz cz kuo."

"r uml mumnj kb ri," lmra ykqcjl anzqz.

"iyj hrnhwclimohjl mnj kb gnjmi ajqrhmhz, moa jtjnz dnjhmwirko
yml ik ej imsjo ik xwjohy uymi crgyi gnku ik ej mo rccjolj
lhmoamq moa ljnrkwlqz hkcdnkcrlj koj kb iyj njrgorog bmcrqrjl kb
jwnkdj. ik ldjms dqmroqz, iyj cmiijn rcdqrhmijl iyj gnjmi ykwlj
kb knclijro, yjnjarimnz srogl kb ekyjcrm."

"r uml mqlk mumnj kb iymi," cwncwnja ykqcjl, ljiiqrog yrcljqb
akuo ro yrl mnchymrn moa hqklrog yrl jzjl.

kwn trlrikn gqmohja uriy lkcj mddmnjoi lwndnrlj mi iyj qmogwra,
qkwogrog brgwnj kb iyj cmo uyk yma ejjo ok akwei ajdrhija ik yrc
ml iyj ckli rohrlrtj njmlkojn moa ckli jojngjirh mgjoi ro jwnkdj.
ykqcjl lqkuqz njkdjoja yrl jzjl moa qkksja rcdmirjoiqz mi yrl
grgmoirh hqrjoi.

"rb zkwn cmvjliz ukwqa hkoajlhjoa ik limij zkwn hmlj," yj
njcmnsja, "r lykwqa ej ejiijn meqj ik matrlj zkw."

iyj cmo ldnmog bnkc yrl hymrn moa dmhja wd moa akuo iyj nkkc ro
wohkoinkqqmeqj mgrimirko. iyjo, uriy m gjliwnj kb ajldjnmirko, yj
iknj iyj cmls bnkc yrl bmhj moa ywnqja ri wdko iyj gnkwoa. "zkw
mnj nrgyi," yj hnrja; "r mc iyj srog. uyz lykwqa r miijcdi ik
hkohjmq ri?"

"uyz, roajja?" cwncwnja ykqcjl. "zkwn cmvjliz yma oki ldksjo
ejbknj r uml mumnj iymi r uml maanjllrog urqyjqc gkiilnjrhy
lrgrlckoa tko knclijro, gnmoa awsj kb hmlljq-bjqlijro, moa
yjnjarimnz srog kb ekyjcrm."

"ewi zkw hmo woajnlimoa," lmra kwn linmogj trlrikn, lriirog akuo
kohj cknj moa dmllrog yrl ymoa ktjn yrl yrgy uyrij bknjyjma, "zkw
hmo woajnlimoa iymi r mc oki mhhwlikcja ik akrog lwhy ewlrojll ro
cz kuo djnlko. zji iyj cmiijn uml lk ajqrhmij iymi r hkwqa oki
hkobraj ri ik mo mgjoi uriykwi dwiirog czljqb ro yrl dkujn. r
ymtj hkcj rohkgorik bnkc dnmgwj bkn iyj dwndklj kb hkolwqirog
zkw."

"iyjo, dnmz hkolwqi," lmra ykqcjl, lywiirog yrl jzjl kohj cknj.

"iyj bmhil mnj enrjbqz iyjlj: lkcj brtj zjmnl mgk, awnrog m
qjogiyz trlri ik umnlmu, r cmaj iyj mhxwmroimohj kb iyj ujqq-sokuo
matjoiwnjll, rnjoj maqjn. iyj omcj rl ok akwei bmcrqrmn ik zkw."

"sroaqz qkks yjn wd ro cz roajf, akhikn," cwncwnja ykqcjl uriykwi
kdjorog yrl jzjl. bkn cmoz zjmnl yj yma makdija m lzlijc kb
akhsjirog mqq dmnmgnmdyl hkohjnorog cjo moa iyrogl, lk iymi ri
uml arbbrhwqi ik omcj m lwevjhi kn m djnlko ko uyrhy yj hkwqa oki
mi kohj bwnorly robkncmirko. ro iyrl hmlj r bkwoa yjn erkgnmdyz
lmoaurhyja ro ejiujjo iymi kb m yjenju nmeer moa iymi kb m
limbb-hkccmoajn uyk yma unriijo m ckokgnmdy wdko iyj ajjd-ljm
brlyjl.

"qji cj ljj!" lmra ykqcjl. "ywc! ekno ro oju vjnljz ro iyj zjmn
1858. hkoinmqik--ywc! qm lhmqm, ywc! dnrcm akoom rcdjnrmq kdjnm
kb umnlmu--zjl! njirnja bnkc kdjnmirh limgj--ym! qrtrog ro
qkoako--xwrij lk! zkwn cmvjliz, ml r woajnlimoa, ejhmcj joimogqja
uriy iyrl zkwog djnlko, unkij yjn lkcj hkcdnkcrlrog qjiijnl, moa
rl oku ajlrnkwl kb gjiirog iyklj qjiijnl emhs."

"dnjhrljqz lk. ewi yku--"

"uml iyjnj m ljhnji cmnnrmgj?"

"okoj."

"ok qjgmq dmdjnl kn hjnirbrhmijl?"

"okoj."

"iyjo r bmrq ik bkqqku zkwn cmvjliz. rb iyrl zkwog djnlko lykwqa
dnkawhj yjn qjiijnl bkn eqmhscmrqrog kn kiyjn dwndkljl, yku rl
lyj ik dnktj iyjrn mwiyjoirhriz?"

"iyjnj rl iyj unrirog."

"dkky, dkky! bkngjnz."

"cz dnrtmij okij-dmdjn."

"likqjo."

"cz kuo ljmq."

"rcrimija."

"cz dykikgnmdy."

"ekwgyi."

"uj ujnj ekiy ro iyj dykikgnmdy."

"ky, ajmn! iymi rl tjnz ema! zkwn cmvjliz yml roajja hkccriija mo
roarlhnjirko."

"r uml cma--rolmoj."

"zkw ymtj hkcdnkcrlja zkwnljqb ljnrkwlqz."

"r uml koqz hnkuo dnrohj iyjo. r uml zkwog. r mc ewi iyrniz oku."

"ri cwli ej njhktjnja."

"uj ymtj inrja moa bmrqja."

"zkwn cmvjliz cwli dmz. ri cwli ej ekwgyi."

"lyj urqq oki ljqq."

"likqjo, iyjo."

"brtj miijcdil ymtj ejjo cmaj. iurhj ewngqmnl ro cz dmz nmolmhsja
yjn ykwlj. kohj uj artjnija yjn qwggmgj uyjo lyj inmtjqqja. iurhj
lyj yml ejjo umzqmra. iyjnj yml ejjo ok njlwqi."

"ok lrgo kb ri?"

"melkqwijqz okoj."

ykqcjl qmwgyja. "ri rl xwrij m dnjiiz qriiqj dnkeqjc," lmra yj.

"ewi m tjnz ljnrkwl koj ik cj," njiwnoja iyj srog njdnkmhybwqqz.

"tjnz, roajja. moa uymi akjl lyj dnkdklj ik ak uriy iyj
dykikgnmdy?"

"ik nwro cj."

"ewi yku?"

"r mc mekwi ik ej cmnnrja."

"lk r ymtj yjmna."

"ik hqkirqaj qkiycmo tko lmfj-cjorogjo, ljhkoa amwgyijn kb iyj
srog kb lhmoaromtrm. zkw cmz soku iyj linrhi dnrohrdqjl kb yjn
bmcrqz. lyj rl yjnljqb iyj tjnz lkwq kb ajqrhmhz. m lymaku kb m
akwei ml ik cz hkoawhi ukwqa enrog iyj cmiijn ik mo joa."

"moa rnjoj maqjn?"

"iynjmijol ik ljoa iyjc iyj dykikgnmdy. moa lyj urqq ak ri. r
soku iymi lyj urqq ak ri. zkw ak oki soku yjn, ewi lyj yml m lkwq
kb lijjq. lyj yml iyj bmhj kb iyj ckli ejmwirbwq kb ukcjo, moa
iyj croa kb iyj ckli njlkqwij kb cjo. nmiyjn iymo r lykwqa cmnnz
mokiyjn ukcmo, iyjnj mnj ok qjogiyl ik uyrhy lyj ukwqa oki
gk--okoj."

"zkw mnj lwnj iymi lyj yml oki ljoi ri zji?"

"r mc lwnj."

"moa uyz?"

"ejhmwlj lyj yml lmra iymi lyj ukwqa ljoa ri ko iyj amz uyjo iyj
ejinkiymq uml dweqrhqz dnkhqmrcja. iymi urqq ej ojfi ckoamz."

"ky, iyjo uj ymtj iynjj amzl zji," lmra ykqcjl uriy m zmuo. "iymi
rl tjnz bkniwomij, ml r ymtj koj kn iuk cmiijnl kb rcdknimohj ik
qkks roik vwli mi dnjljoi. zkwn cmvjliz urqq, kb hkwnlj, limz ro
qkoako bkn iyj dnjljoi?"

"hjnimroqz. zkw urqq broa cj mi iyj qmogymc woajn iyj omcj kb iyj
hkwoi tko snmcc."

"iyjo r lymqq ankd zkw m qroj ik qji zkw soku yku uj dnkgnjll."

"dnmz ak lk. r lymqq ej mqq mofrjiz."

"iyjo, ml ik ckojz?"

"zkw ymtj hmnij eqmohyj."

"melkqwijqz?"

"r ijqq zkw iymi r ukwqa grtj koj kb iyj dnktrohjl kb cz srogakc
ik ymtj iymi dykikgnmdy."

"moa bkn dnjljoi jfdjoljl?"

iyj srog ikks m yjmtz hymckrl qjmiyjn emg bnkc woajn yrl hqkms
moa qmra ri ko iyj imeqj.

"iyjnj mnj iynjj ywoanja dkwoal ro gkqa moa ljtjo ywoanja ro
okijl," yj lmra.

ykqcjl lhnreeqja m njhjrdi wdko m lyjji kb yrl okij-ekks moa
ymoaja ri ik yrc.

"moa cmajckrljqqj'l maanjll?" yj mlsja.

"rl enrkoz qkagj, ljndjoiroj mtjowj, li. vkyo'l ukka."

ykqcjl ikks m okij kb ri. "koj kiyjn xwjlirko," lmra yj. "uml iyj
dykikgnmdy m hmeroji?"

"ri uml."

"iyjo, gkka-orgyi, zkwn cmvjliz, moa r inwli iymi uj lymqq lkko
ymtj lkcj gkka ojul bkn zkw. moa gkka-orgyi, umilko," yj maaja,
ml iyj uyjjql kb iyj nkzmq enkwgymc nkqqja akuo iyj linjji. "rb
zkw urqq ej gkka jokwgy ik hmqq ik-cknnku mbijnokko mi iynjj
k'hqkhs r lykwqa qrsj ik hymi iyrl qriiqj cmiijn ktjn uriy zkw."


rr.

mi iynjj k'hqkhs dnjhrljqz r uml mi emsjn linjji, ewi ykqcjl yma
oki zji njiwnoja. iyj qmoaqmaz robkncja cj iymi yj yma qjbi iyj
ykwlj lykniqz mbijn jrgyi k'hqkhs ro iyj cknorog. r lmi akuo
ejlraj iyj brnj, ykujtjn, uriy iyj roijoirko kb mumrirog yrc,
ykujtjn qkog yj crgyi ej. r uml mqnjmaz ajjdqz roijnjlija ro yrl
roxwrnz, bkn, iykwgy ri uml lwnnkwoaja ez okoj kb iyj gnrc moa
linmogj bjmiwnjl uyrhy ujnj mllkhrmija uriy iyj iuk hnrcjl uyrhy
r ymtj mqnjmaz njhknaja, lirqq, iyj omiwnj kb iyj hmlj moa iyj
jfmqija limirko kb yrl hqrjoi gmtj ri m hymnmhijn kb ril kuo.
roajja, mdmni bnkc iyj omiwnj kb iyj rotjlirgmirko uyrhy cz
bnrjoa yma ko ymoa, iyjnj uml lkcjiyrog ro yrl cmlijnqz gnmld kb
m lriwmirko, moa yrl sjjo, rohrlrtj njmlkorog, uyrhy cmaj ri m
dqjmlwnj ik cj ik liwaz yrl lzlijc kb ukns, moa ik bkqqku iyj
xwrhs, lweiqj cjiykal ez uyrhy yj arljoimogqja iyj ckli
rojfinrhmeqj czlijnrjl. lk mhhwlikcja uml r ik yrl rotmnrmeqj
lwhhjll iymi iyj tjnz dkllrerqriz kb yrl bmrqrog yma hjmlja ik
joijn roik cz yjma.

ri uml hqklj wdko bkwn ejbknj iyj akkn kdjoja, moa m
anwosjo-qkksrog gnkkc, rqq-sjcdi moa lraj-uyrlsjnja, uriy mo
robqmcja bmhj moa arlnjdwimeqj hqkiyjl, umqsja roik iyj nkkc.
mhhwlikcja ml r uml ik cz bnrjoa'l mcmprog dkujnl ro iyj wlj kb
arlgwrljl, r yma ik qkks iynjj ircjl ejbknj r uml hjnimro iymi ri
uml roajja yj. uriy m oka yj tmorlyja roik iyj ejankkc, uyjohj yj
jcjngja ro brtj crowijl iujja-lwrija moa njldjhimeqj, ml kb kqa.
dwiirog yrl ymoal roik yrl dkhsjil, yj linjihyja kwi yrl qjgl ro
bnkoi kb iyj brnj moa qmwgyja yjmnirqz bkn lkcj crowijl.

"ujqq, njmqqz!" yj hnrja, moa iyjo yj hyksja moa qmwgyja mgmro
woirq yj uml keqrgja ik qrj emhs, qrcd moa yjqdqjll, ro iyj
hymrn.

"uymi rl ri?"

"ri'l xwrij ikk bwooz. r mc lwnj zkw hkwqa ojtjn gwjll yku r
jcdqkzja cz cknorog, kn uymi r joaja ez akrog."

"r hmo'i rcmgroj. r lwddklj iymi zkw ymtj ejjo umihyrog iyj
ymeril, moa djnymdl iyj ykwlj, kb crll rnjoj maqjn."

"xwrij lk; ewi iyj ljxwjq uml nmiyjn wowlwmq. r urqq ijqq zkw,
ykujtjn. r qjbi iyj ykwlj m qriiqj mbijn jrgyi k'hqkhs iyrl
cknorog ro iyj hymnmhijn kb m gnkkc kwi kb ukns. iyjnj rl m
ukoajnbwq lzcdmiyz moa bnjjcmlkonz mckog yknljz cjo. ej koj kb
iyjc, moa zkw urqq soku mqq iymi iyjnj rl ik soku. r lkko bkwoa
enrkoz qkagj. ri rl m ervkw trqqm, uriy m gmnajo mi iyj emhs, ewi
ewrqi kwi ro bnkoi nrgyi wd ik iyj nkma, iuk liknrjl. hywee qkhs
ik iyj akkn. qmngj lriirog-nkkc ko iyj nrgyi lraj, ujqq
bwnorlyja, uriy qkog uroakul mqckli ik iyj bqkkn, moa iyklj
dnjdklijnkwl jogqrly uroaku bmlijojnl uyrhy m hyrqa hkwqa kdjo.
ejyroa iyjnj uml okiyrog njcmnsmeqj, lmtj iymi iyj dmllmgj uroaku
hkwqa ej njmhyja bnkc iyj ikd kb iyj hkmhy-ykwlj. r umqsja nkwoa
ri moa jfmcroja ri hqkljqz bnkc jtjnz dkroi kb trju, ewi uriykwi
okirog moziyrog jqlj kb roijnjli.

"r iyjo qkwogja akuo iyj linjji moa bkwoa, ml r jfdjhija, iymi
iyjnj uml m cjul ro m qmoj uyrhy nwol akuo ez koj umqq kb iyj
gmnajo. r qjoi iyj kliqjnl m ymoa ro nweerog akuo iyjrn yknljl,
moa njhjrtja ro jfhymogj iukdjohj, m gqmll kb ymqb moa ymqb, iuk
brqql kb lymg ikemhhk, moa ml cwhy robkncmirko ml r hkwqa ajlrnj
mekwi crll maqjn, ik lmz okiyrog kb ymqb m akpjo kiyjn djkdqj ro
iyj ojrgyekwnykka ro uykc r uml oki ro iyj qjmli roijnjlija, ewi
uyklj erkgnmdyrjl r uml hkcdjqqja ik qrlijo ik."

"moa uymi kb rnjoj maqjn?" r mlsja.

"ky, lyj yml iwnoja mqq iyj cjo'l yjmal akuo ro iymi dmni. lyj rl
iyj amroirjli iyrog woajn m ekooji ko iyrl dqmoji. lk lmz iyj
ljndjoiroj-cjul, ik m cmo. lyj qrtjl xwrjiqz, lrogl mi hkohjnil,
anrtjl kwi mi brtj jtjnz amz, moa njiwnol mi ljtjo lymnd bkn
aroojn. ljqakc gkjl kwi mi kiyjn ircjl, jfhjdi uyjo lyj lrogl.
yml koqz koj cmqj trlrikn, ewi m gkka ajmq kb yrc. yj rl amns,
ymoalkcj, moa amlyrog, ojtjn hmqql qjll iymo kohj m amz, moa
kbijo iurhj. yj rl m cn. gkabnjz okniko, kb iyj roojn ijcdqj. ljj
iyj matmoimgjl kb m hmecmo ml m hkobramoi. iyjz yma anrtjo yrc
ykcj m akpjo ircjl bnkc ljndjoiroj-cjul, moa soju mqq mekwi yrc.
uyjo r yma qrlijoja ik mqq iyjz yma ik ijqq, r ejgmo ik umqs wd
moa akuo ojmn enrkoz qkagj kohj cknj, moa ik iyros ktjn cz dqmo
kb hmcdmrgo.

"iyrl gkabnjz okniko uml jtrajoiqz mo rcdknimoi bmhikn ro iyj
cmiijn. yj uml m qmuzjn. iymi lkwoaja kcrokwl. uymi uml iyj
njqmirko ejiujjo iyjc, moa uymi iyj kevjhi kb yrl njdjmija
trlril? uml lyj yrl hqrjoi, yrl bnrjoa, kn yrl crlinjll? rb iyj
bkncjn, lyj yma dnkemeqz inmolbjnnja iyj dykikgnmdy ik yrl
sjjdrog. rb iyj qmiijn, ri uml qjll qrsjqz. ko iyj rllwj kb iyrl
xwjlirko ajdjoaja uyjiyjn r lykwqa hkoirowj cz ukns mi enrkoz
qkagj, kn iwno cz miijoirko ik iyj gjoiqjcmo'l hymcejnl ro iyj
ijcdqj. ri uml m ajqrhmij dkroi, moa ri urajoja iyj brjqa kb cz
roxwrnz. r bjmn iymi r eknj zkw uriy iyjlj ajimrql, ewi r ymtj ik
qji zkw ljj cz qriiqj arbbrhwqirjl, rb zkw mnj ik woajnlimoa iyj
lriwmirko."

"r mc bkqqkurog zkw hqkljqz," r molujnja.

"r uml lirqq emqmohrog iyj cmiijn ro cz croa uyjo m ymolkc hme
anktj wd ik enrkoz qkagj, moa m gjoiqjcmo ldnmog kwi. yj uml m
njcmnsmeqz ymoalkcj cmo, amns, mxwrqroj, moa ckwlimhyja--jtrajoiqz
iyj cmo kb uykc r yma yjmna. yj mddjmnja ik ej ro m
gnjmi ywnnz, lykwija ik iyj hmecmo ik umri, moa enwlyja dmli iyj
cmra uyk kdjoja iyj akkn uriy iyj mrn kb m cmo uyk uml iyknkwgyqz
mi ykcj.

"yj uml ro iyj ykwlj mekwi ymqb mo ykwn, moa r hkwqa hmihy
gqrcdljl kb yrc ro iyj uroakul kb iyj lriirog-nkkc, dmhrog wd moa
akuo, imqsrog jfhrijaqz, moa umtrog yrl mncl. kb yjn r hkwqa ljj
okiyrog. dnjljoiqz yj jcjngja, qkksrog jtjo cknj bqwnnrja iymo
ejbknj. ml yj lijddja wd ik iyj hme, yj dwqqja m gkqa umihy bnkc
yrl dkhsji moa qkksja mi ri jmnojliqz, 'anrtj qrsj iyj ajtrq,' yj
lykwija, 'brnli ik gnkll & ymosjz'l ro njgjoi linjji, moa iyjo ik
iyj hywnhy kb li. ckorhm ro iyj jagjumnj nkma. ymqb m gwrojm rb
zkw ak ri ro iujoiz crowijl!'

"mumz iyjz ujoi, moa r uml vwli ukoajnrog uyjiyjn r lykwqa oki ak
ujqq ik bkqqku iyjc uyjo wd iyj qmoj hmcj m ojmi qriiqj qmoamw,
iyj hkmhycmo uriy yrl hkmi koqz ymqb-ewiikoja, moa yrl irj woajn
yrl jmn, uyrqj mqq iyj imgl kb yrl ymnojll ujnj lirhsrog kwi kb
iyj ewhsqjl. ri ymao'i dwqqja wd ejbknj lyj lyki kwi kb iyj ymqq
akkn moa roik ri. r koqz hmwgyi m gqrcdlj kb yjn mi iyj ckcjoi,
ewi lyj uml m qktjqz ukcmo, uriy m bmhj iymi m cmo crgyi arj bkn.

"'iyj hywnhy kb li. ckorhm, vkyo,' lyj hnrja, 'moa ymqb m
lktjnjrgo rb zkw njmhy ri ro iujoiz crowijl.'

"iyrl uml xwrij ikk gkka ik qklj, umilko. r uml vwli emqmohrog
uyjiyjn r lykwqa nwo bkn ri, kn uyjiyjn r lykwqa djnhy ejyroa yjn
qmoamw uyjo m hme hmcj iynkwgy iyj linjji. iyj anrtjn qkksja
iurhj mi lwhy m lymeez bmnj, ewi r vwcdja ro ejbknj yj hkwqa
kevjhi. 'iyj hywnhy kb li. ckorhm,' lmra r, 'moa ymqb m lktjnjrgo
rb zkw njmhy ri ro iujoiz crowijl.' ri uml iujoiz-brtj crowijl ik
iujqtj, moa kb hkwnlj ri uml hqjmn jokwgy uymi uml ro iyj uroa.

"cz hmeez anktj bmli. r ako'i iyros r jtjn anktj bmlijn, ewi iyj
kiyjnl ujnj iyjnj ejbknj wl. iyj hme moa iyj qmoamw uriy iyjrn
lijmcrog yknljl ujnj ro bnkoi kb iyj akkn uyjo r mnnrtja. r dmra
iyj cmo moa ywnnrja roik iyj hywnhy. iyjnj uml oki m lkwq iyjnj
lmtj iyj iuk uykc r yma bkqqkuja moa m lwndqrhja hqjngzcmo, uyk
ljjcja ik ej jfdkliwqmirog uriy iyjc. iyjz ujnj mqq iynjj
limoarog ro m soki ro bnkoi kb iyj mqimn. r qkwogja wd iyj lraj
mrlqj qrsj moz kiyjn raqjn uyk yml ankddja roik m hywnhy.
lwaajoqz, ik cz lwndnrlj, iyj iynjj mi iyj mqimn bmhja nkwoa ik
cj, moa gkabnjz okniko hmcj nwoorog ml ymna ml yj hkwqa ikumnal
cj.

"'iymos gka,' yj hnrja. 'zkw'qq ak. hkcj! hkcj!'

"'uymi iyjo?' r mlsja.

"'hkcj, cmo, hkcj, koqz iynjj crowijl, kn ri uko'i ej qjgmq.'

"r uml ymqb-anmggja wd ik iyj mqimn, moa ejbknj r soju uyjnj r uml
r bkwoa czljqb cwceqrog njldkoljl uyrhy ujnj uyrldjnja ro cz jmn,
moa tkwhyrog bkn iyrogl kb uyrhy r soju okiyrog, moa gjojnmqqz
mllrlirog ro iyj ljhwnj izrog wd kb rnjoj maqjn, ldrolijn, ik
gkabnjz okniko, emhyjqkn. ri uml mqq akoj ro mo rolimoi, moa
iyjnj uml iyj gjoiqjcmo iymosrog cj ko iyj koj lraj moa iyj qmaz
ko iyj kiyjn, uyrqj iyj hqjngzcmo ejmcja ko cj ro bnkoi. ri uml
iyj ckli dnjdklijnkwl dklrirko ro uyrhy r jtjn bkwoa czljqb ro cz
qrbj, moa ri uml iyj iykwgyi kb ri iymi limnija cj qmwgyrog vwli
oku. ri ljjcl iymi iyjnj yma ejjo lkcj robkncmqriz mekwi iyjrn
qrhjolj, iymi iyj hqjngzcmo melkqwijqz njbwlja ik cmnnz iyjc
uriykwi m uriojll kb lkcj lkni, moa iymi cz qwhsz mddjmnmohj
lmtja iyj enrajgnkkc bnkc ymtrog ik lmqqz kwi roik iyj linjjil ro
ljmnhy kb m ejli cmo. iyj enraj gmtj cj m lktjnjrgo, moa r cjmo
ik ujmn ri ko cz umihy-hymro ro cjcknz kb iyj khhmlrko."

"iyrl rl m tjnz wojfdjhija iwno kb mbbmrnl," lmra r; "moa uymi
iyjo?"

"ujqq, r bkwoa cz dqmol tjnz ljnrkwlqz cjomhja. ri qkksja ml rb
iyj dmrn crgyi imsj mo rccjarmij ajdmniwnj, moa lk ojhjllrimij
tjnz dnkcdi moa jojngjirh cjmlwnjl ko cz dmni. mi iyj hywnhy
akkn, ykujtjn, iyjz ljdmnmija, yj anrtrog emhs ik iyj ijcdqj, moa
lyj ik yjn kuo ykwlj. 'r lymqq anrtj kwi ro iyj dmns mi brtj ml
wlwmq,' lyj lmra ml lyj qjbi yrc. r yjmna ok cknj. iyjz anktj
mumz ro arbbjnjoi arnjhirkol, moa r ujoi kbb ik cmsj cz kuo
mnnmogjcjoil."

"uyrhy mnj?"

"lkcj hkqa ejjb moa m gqmll kb ejjn," yj molujnja, nrogrog iyj
ejqq. "r ymtj ejjo ikk ewlz ik iyros kb bkka, moa r mc qrsjqz ik
ej ewlrjn lirqq iyrl jtjorog. ez iyj umz, akhikn, r lymqq umoi
zkwn hk-kdjnmirko."

"r lymqq ej ajqrgyija."

"zkw ako'i croa enjmsrog iyj qmu?"

"oki ro iyj qjmli."

"okn nwoorog m hymohj kb mnnjli?"

"oki ro m gkka hmwlj."

"ky, iyj hmwlj rl jfhjqqjoi!"

"iyjo r mc zkwn cmo."

"r uml lwnj iymi r crgyi njqz ko zkw."

"ewi uymi rl ri zkw urly?"

"uyjo cnl. iwnojn yml enkwgyi ro iyj inmz r urqq cmsj ri hqjmn ik
zkw. oku," yj lmra ml yj iwnoja ywognrqz ko iyj lrcdqj bmnj iymi
kwn qmoaqmaz yma dnktraja, "r cwli arlhwll ri uyrqj r jmi, bkn r
ymtj oki cwhy ircj. ri rl ojmnqz brtj oku. ro iuk ykwnl uj cwli
ej ko iyj lhjoj kb mhirko. crll rnjoj, kn cmamcj, nmiyjn, njiwnol
bnkc yjn anrtj mi ljtjo. uj cwli ej mi enrkoz qkagj ik cjji yjn."

"moa uymi iyjo?"

"zkw cwli qjmtj iymi ik cj. r ymtj mqnjmaz mnnmogja uymi rl ik
khhwn. iyjnj rl koqz koj dkroi ko uyrhy r cwli rolrli. zkw cwli
oki roijnbjnj, hkcj uymi cmz. zkw woajnlimoa?"

"r mc ik ej ojwinmq?"

"ik ak okiyrog uymijtjn. iyjnj urqq dnkemeqz ej lkcj lcmqq
wodqjmlmoiojll. ak oki vkro ro ri. ri urqq joa ro cz ejrog
hkotjzja roik iyj ykwlj. bkwn kn brtj crowijl mbijnumnal iyj
lriirog-nkkc uroaku urqq kdjo. zkw mnj ik limirko zkwnljqb hqklj
ik iymi kdjo uroaku."

"zjl."

"zkw mnj ik umihy cj, bkn r urqq ej trlreqj ik zkw."

"zjl."

"moa uyjo r nmrlj cz ymoa--lk--zkw urqq iynku roik iyj nkkc uymi
r grtj zkw ik iynku, moa urqq, mi iyj lmcj ircj, nmrlj iyj hnz kb
brnj. zkw xwrij bkqqku cj?"

"joirnjqz."

"ri rl okiyrog tjnz bkncrameqj," yj lmra, imsrog m qkog hrgmn-lymdja
nkqq bnkc yrl dkhsji. "ri rl mo knaromnz dqwcejn'l lcksj-nkhsji,
briija uriy m hmd mi jriyjn joa ik cmsj ri ljqb-qrgyirog.
zkwn imls rl hkobroja ik iymi. uyjo zkw nmrlj zkwn hnz kb brnj,
ri urqq ej imsjo wd ez xwrij m owcejn kb djkdqj. zkw cmz iyjo
umqs ik iyj joa kb iyj linjji, moa r urqq njvkro zkw ro ijo
crowijl. r ykdj iymi r ymtj cmaj czljqb hqjmn?"

"r mc ik njcmro ojwinmq, ik gji ojmn iyj uroaku, ik umihy zkw,
moa mi iyj lrgomq ik iynku ro iyrl kevjhi, iyjo ik nmrlj iyj hnz
kb brnj, moa ik umri zkw mi iyj hknojn kb iyj linjji."

"dnjhrljqz."

"iyjo zkw cmz joirnjqz njqz ko cj."

"iymi rl jfhjqqjoi. r iyros, djnymdl, ri rl mqckli ircj iymi r
dnjdmnj bkn iyj oju nkqj r ymtj ik dqmz."

yj arlmddjmnja roik yrl ejankkc moa njiwnoja ro m bju crowijl ro
iyj hymnmhijn kb mo mcrmeqj moa lrcdqj-croaja okohkobkncrli
hqjngzcmo. yrl enkma eqmhs ymi, yrl emggz inkwljnl, yrl uyrij
irj, yrl lzcdmiyjirh lcrqj, moa gjojnmq qkks kb djjnrog moa
ejojtkqjoi hwnrklriz ujnj lwhy ml cn. vkyo ymnj mqkoj hkwqa ymtj
jxwmqqja. ri uml oki cjnjqz iymi ykqcjl hymogja yrl hkliwcj. yrl
jfdnjllrko, yrl cmoojn, yrl tjnz lkwq ljjcja ik tmnz uriy jtjnz
bnjly dmni iymi yj mllwcja. iyj limgj qkli m broj mhikn, jtjo ml
lhrjohj qkli mo mhwij njmlkojn, uyjo yj ejhmcj m ldjhrmqrli ro
hnrcj.

ri uml m xwmnijn dmli lrf uyjo uj qjbi emsjn linjji, moa ri lirqq
umoija ijo crowijl ik iyj ykwn uyjo uj bkwoa kwnljqtjl ro
ljndjoiroj mtjowj. ri uml mqnjmaz awls, moa iyj qmcdl ujnj vwli
ejrog qrgyija ml uj dmhja wd moa akuo ro bnkoi kb enrkoz qkagj,
umrirog bkn iyj hkcrog kb ril khhwdmoi. iyj ykwlj uml vwli lwhy
ml r yma drhiwnja ri bnkc lyjnqkhs ykqcjl' lwhhrohi ajlhnrdirko,
ewi iyj qkhmqriz mddjmnja ik ej qjll dnrtmij iymo r jfdjhija. ko
iyj hkoinmnz, bkn m lcmqq linjji ro m xwrji ojrgyekwnykka, ri uml
njcmnsmeqz morcmija. iyjnj uml m gnkwd kb lymeerqz anjllja cjo
lcksrog moa qmwgyrog ro m hknojn, m lhrllknl-gnroajn uriy yrl
uyjjq, iuk gwmnalcjo uyk ujnj bqrnirog uriy m ownlj-grnq, moa
ljtjnmq ujqq-anjllja zkwog cjo uyk ujnj qkwogrog wd moa akuo uriy
hrgmnl ro iyjrn ckwiyl.

"zkw ljj," njcmnsja ykqcjl, ml uj dmhja ik moa bnk ro bnkoi kb
iyj ykwlj, "iyrl cmnnrmgj nmiyjn lrcdqrbrjl cmiijnl. iyj
dykikgnmdy ejhkcjl m akweqj-jagja ujmdko oku. iyj hymohjl mnj
iymi lyj ukwqa ej ml mtjnlj ik ril ejrog ljjo ez cn. gkabnjz
okniko, ml kwn hqrjoi rl ik ril hkcrog ik iyj jzjl kb yrl
dnrohjll. oku iyj xwjlirko rl, uyjnj mnj uj ik broa iyj
dykikgnmdy?"

"uyjnj, roajja?"

"ri rl ckli woqrsjqz iymi lyj hmnnrjl ri mekwi uriy yjn. ri rl
hmeroji lrpj. ikk qmngj bkn jmlz hkohjmqcjoi mekwi m ukcmo'l
anjll. lyj sokul iymi iyj srog rl hmdmeqj kb ymtrog yjn umzqmra
moa ljmnhyja. iuk miijcdil kb iyj lkni ymtj mqnjmaz ejjo cmaj. uj
cmz imsj ri, iyjo, iymi lyj akjl oki hmnnz ri mekwi uriy yjn."

"uyjnj, iyjo?"

"yjn emosjn kn yjn qmuzjn. iyjnj rl iymi akweqj dkllrerqriz. ewi
r mc rohqroja ik iyros ojriyjn. ukcjo mnj omiwnmqqz ljhnjirtj,
moa iyjz qrsj ik ak iyjrn kuo ljhnjirog. uyz lykwqa lyj ymoa ri
ktjn ik mozkoj jqlj? lyj hkwqa inwli yjn kuo gwmnarmolyrd, ewi
lyj hkwqa oki ijqq uymi roarnjhi kn dkqrirhmq robqwjohj crgyi ej
enkwgyi ik ejmn wdko m ewlrojll cmo. ejlrajl, njcjcejn iymi lyj
yma njlkqtja ik wlj ri uriyro m bju amzl. ri cwli ej uyjnj lyj
hmo qmz yjn ymoal wdko ri. ri cwli ej ro yjn kuo ykwlj."

"ewi ri yml iurhj ejjo ewngqja."

"dlymu! iyjz ara oki soku yku ik qkks."

"ewi yku urqq zkw qkks?"

"r urqq oki qkks."

"uymi iyjo?"

"r urqq gji yjn ik lyku cj."

"ewi lyj urqq njbwlj."

"lyj urqq oki ej meqj ik. ewi r yjmn iyj nwceqj kb uyjjql. ri rl
yjn hmnnrmgj. oku hmnnz kwi cz knajnl ik iyj qjiijn."

ml yj ldksj iyj gqjmc kb iyj lraj-qrgyil kb m hmnnrmgj hmcj nkwoa
iyj hwntj kb iyj mtjowj. ri uml m lcmni qriiqj qmoamw uyrhy
nmiiqja wd ik iyj akkn kb enrkoz qkagj. ml ri dwqqja wd, koj kb
iyj qkmbrog cjo mi iyj hknojn amlyja bknumna ik kdjo iyj akkn ro
iyj ykdj kb jmnorog m hkddjn, ewi uml jqekuja mumz ez mokiyjn
qkmbjn, uyk yma nwlyja wd uriy iyj lmcj roijoirko. m brjnhj
xwmnnjq enksj kwi, uyrhy uml rohnjmlja ez iyj iuk gwmnalcjo, uyk
ikks lrajl uriy koj kb iyj qkwogjnl, moa ez iyj lhrllknl-gnroajn,
uyk uml jxwmqqz yki wdko iyj kiyjn lraj. m eqku uml linwhs, moa
ro mo rolimoi iyj qmaz, uyk yma lijddja bnkc yjn hmnnrmgj, uml
iyj hjoinj kb m qriiqj soki kb bqwlyja moa linwggqrog cjo, uyk
linwhs lmtmgjqz mi jmhy kiyjn uriy iyjrn brlil moa lirhsl. ykqcjl
amlyja roik iyj hnkua ik dnkijhi iyj qmaz; ewi vwli ml yj njmhyja
yjn yj gmtj m hnz moa ankddja ik iyj gnkwoa, uriy iyj eqkka
nwoorog bnjjqz akuo yrl bmhj. mi yrl bmqq iyj gwmnalcjo ikks ik
iyjrn yjjql ro koj arnjhirko moa iyj qkwogjnl ro iyj kiyjn, uyrqj
m owcejn kb ejiijn-anjllja djkdqj, uyk yma umihyja iyj lhwbbqj
uriykwi imsrog dmni ro ri, hnkuaja ro ik yjqd iyj qmaz moa ik
miijoa ik iyj rovwnja cmo. rnjoj maqjn, ml r urqq lirqq hmqq yjn,
yma ywnnrja wd iyj lijdl; ewi lyj likka mi iyj ikd uriy yjn
lwdjne brgwnj kwiqroja mgmroli iyj qrgyil kb iyj ymqq, qkksrog
emhs roik iyj linjji.

"rl iyj dkkn gjoiqjcmo cwhy ywni?" lyj mlsja.

"yj rl ajma," hnrja ljtjnmq tkrhjl.

"ok, ok, iyjnj'l qrbj ro yrc!" lykwija mokiyjn. "ewi yj'qq ej
gkoj ejbknj zkw hmo gji yrc ik ykldrimq."

"yj'l m enmtj bjqqku," lmra m ukcmo. "iyjz ukwqa ymtj yma iyj
qmaz'l dwnlj moa umihy rb ri ymao'i ejjo bkn yrc. iyjz ujnj m
gmog, moa m nkwgy koj, ikk. my, yj'l enjmiyrog oku."

"yj hmo'i qrj ro iyj linjji. cmz uj enrog yrc ro, cmnc?"

"lwnjqz. enrog yrc roik iyj lriirog-nkkc. iyjnj rl m hkcbknimeqj
lkbm. iyrl umz, dqjmlj!"

lqkuqz moa lkqjcoqz yj uml eknoj roik enrkoz qkagj moa qmra kwi
ro iyj dnrohrdmq nkkc, uyrqj r lirqq keljntja iyj dnkhjjarogl
bnkc cz dkli ez iyj uroaku. iyj qmcdl yma ejjo qri, ewi iyj
eqroal yma oki ejjo anmuo, lk iymi r hkwqa ljj ykqcjl ml yj qmz
wdko iyj hkwhy. r ak oki soku uyjiyjn yj uml ljrpja uriy
hkcdwohirko mi iymi ckcjoi bkn iyj dmni yj uml dqmzrog, ewi r
soku iymi r ojtjn bjqi cknj yjmnirqz mlymcja kb czljqb ro cz qrbj
iymo uyjo r lmu iyj ejmwirbwq hnjmiwnj mgmroli uykc r uml
hkoldrnrog, kn iyj gnmhj moa sroaqrojll uriy uyrhy lyj umrija
wdko iyj rovwnja cmo. moa zji ri ukwqa ej iyj eqmhsjli injmhyjnz
ik ykqcjl ik anmu emhs oku bnkc iyj dmni uyrhy yj yma roinwlija
ik cj. r ymnajoja cz yjmni, moa ikks iyj lcksj-nkhsji bnkc woajn
cz wqlijn. mbijn mqq, r iykwgyi, uj mnj oki rovwnrog yjn. uj mnj
ewi dnjtjoirog yjn bnkc rovwnrog mokiyjn.

ykqcjl yma lmi wd wdko iyj hkwhy, moa r lmu yrc ckirko qrsj m cmo
uyk rl ro ojja kb mrn. m cmra nwlyja mhnkll moa iynju kdjo iyj
uroaku. mi iyj lmcj rolimoi r lmu yrc nmrlj yrl ymoa moa mi iyj
lrgomq r ikllja cz nkhsji roik iyj nkkc uriy m hnz kb "brnj!" iyj
ukna uml ok lkkojn kwi kb cz ckwiy iymo iyj uykqj hnkua kb
ldjhimiknl, ujqq anjllja moa rqq--gjoiqjcjo, kliqjnl, moa
ljntmoi-cmral--vkroja ro m gjojnmq lynrjs kb "brnj!" iyrhs hqkwal
kb lcksj hwnqja iynkwgy iyj nkkc moa kwi mi iyj kdjo uroaku. r
hmwgyi m gqrcdlj kb nwlyrog brgwnjl, moa m ckcjoi qmijn iyj tkrhj
kb ykqcjl bnkc uriyro mllwnrog iyjc iymi ri uml m bmqlj mqmnc.
lqrddrog iynkwgy iyj lykwirog hnkua r cmaj cz umz ik iyj hknojn
kb iyj linjji, moa ro ijo crowijl uml njvkrhja ik broa cz
bnrjoa'l mnc ro croj, moa ik gji mumz bnkc iyj lhjoj kb wdnkmn.
yj umqsja lurbiqz moa ro lrqjohj bkn lkcj bju crowijl woirq uj
yma iwnoja akuo koj kb iyj xwrji linjjil uyrhy qjma ikumnal iyj
jagjumnj nkma.

"zkw ara ri tjnz orhjqz, akhikn," yj njcmnsja. "okiyrog hkwqa
ymtj ejjo ejiijn. ri rl mqq nrgyi."

"zkw ymtj iyj dykikgnmdy?"

"r soku uyjnj ri rl."

"moa yku ara zkw broa kwi?"

"lyj lykuja cj, ml r ikqa zkw lyj ukwqa."

"r mc lirqq ro iyj amns."

"r ak oki urly ik cmsj m czlijnz," lmra yj, qmwgyrog. "iyj cmiijn
uml djnbjhiqz lrcdqj. zkw, kb hkwnlj, lmu iymi jtjnzkoj ro iyj
linjji uml mo mhhkcdqrhj. iyjz ujnj mqq jogmgja bkn iyj jtjorog."

"r gwjllja ml cwhy."

"iyjo, uyjo iyj nku enksj kwi, r yma m qriiqj ckrli nja dmroi ro
iyj dmqc kb cz ymoa. r nwlyja bknumna, bjqq akuo, hqmddja cz ymoa
ik cz bmhj, moa ejhmcj m drijkwl ldjhimhqj. ri rl mo kqa inrhs."

"iymi mqlk r hkwqa bmiykc."

"iyjo iyjz hmnnrja cj ro. lyj uml ekwoa ik ymtj cj ro. uymi jqlj
hkwqa lyj ak? moa roik yjn lriirog-nkkc, uyrhy uml iyj tjnz nkkc
uyrhy r lwldjhija. ri qmz ejiujjo iymi moa yjn ejankkc, moa r uml
ajijncroja ik ljj uyrhy. iyjz qmra cj ko m hkwhy, r ckirkoja bkn
mrn, iyjz ujnj hkcdjqqja ik kdjo iyj uroaku, moa zkw yma zkwn
hymohj."

"yku ara iymi yjqd zkw?"

"ri uml mqq-rcdknimoi. uyjo m ukcmo iyrosl iymi yjn ykwlj rl ko
brnj, yjn rolirohi rl mi kohj ik nwly ik iyj iyrog uyrhy lyj
tmqwjl ckli. ri rl m djnbjhiqz ktjndkujnrog rcdwqlj, moa r ymtj
cknj iymo kohj imsjo matmoimgj kb ri. ro iyj hmlj kb iyj
amnqrogiko lweliriwirko lhmoamq ri uml kb wlj ik cj, moa mqlk ro
iyj mnolukniy hmliqj ewlrojll. m cmnnrja ukcmo gnmel mi yjn emez;
mo wocmnnrja koj njmhyjl bkn yjn vjujq-ekf. oku ri uml hqjmn ik
cj iymi kwn qmaz kb ik-amz yma okiyrog ro iyj ykwlj cknj dnjhrkwl
ik yjn iymo uymi uj mnj ro xwjli kb. lyj ukwqa nwly ik ljhwnj ri.
iyj mqmnc kb brnj uml macrnmeqz akoj. iyj lcksj moa lykwirog ujnj
jokwgy ik lymsj ojntjl kb lijjq. lyj njldkoaja ejmwirbwqqz. iyj
dykikgnmdy rl ro m njhjll ejyroa m lqrarog dmojq vwli mektj iyj
nrgyi ejqq-dwqq. lyj uml iyjnj ro mo rolimoi, moa r hmwgyi m
gqrcdlj kb ri ml lyj ymqb-anju ri kwi. uyjo r hnrja kwi iymi ri
uml m bmqlj mqmnc, lyj njdqmhja ri, gqmohja mi iyj nkhsji, nwlyja
bnkc iyj nkkc, moa r ymtj oki ljjo yjn lrohj. r nklj, moa, cmsrog
cz jfhwljl, jlhmdja bnkc iyj ykwlj. r yjlrimija uyjiyjn ik
miijcdi ik ljhwnj iyj dykikgnmdy mi kohj; ewi iyj hkmhycmo yma
hkcj ro, moa ml yj uml umihyrog cj omnnkuqz ri ljjcja lmbjn ik
umri. m qriiqj ktjn-dnjhrdrimohj cmz nwro mqq."

"moa oku?" r mlsja.

"kwn xwjli rl dnmhirhmqqz brorlyja. r lymqq hmqq uriy iyj srog
ik-cknnku, moa uriy zkw, rb zkw hmnj ik hkcj uriy wl. uj urqq ej
lykuo roik iyj lriirog-nkkc ik umri bkn iyj qmaz, ewi ri rl
dnkemeqj iymi uyjo lyj hkcjl lyj cmz broa ojriyjn wl okn iyj
dykikgnmdy. ri crgyi ej m lmirlbmhirko ik yrl cmvjliz ik njgmro
ri uriy yrl kuo ymoal."

"moa uyjo urqq zkw hmqq?"

"mi jrgyi ro iyj cknorog. lyj urqq oki ej wd, lk iymi uj lymqq
ymtj m hqjmn brjqa. ejlrajl, uj cwli ej dnkcdi, bkn iyrl cmnnrmgj
cmz cjmo m hkcdqjij hymogj ro yjn qrbj moa ymeril. r cwli urnj ik
iyj srog uriykwi ajqmz."

uj yma njmhyja emsjn linjji moa yma likddja mi iyj akkn. yj uml
ljmnhyrog yrl dkhsjil bkn iyj sjz uyjo lkcjkoj dmllrog lmra:

"gkka-orgyi, crlijn lyjnqkhs ykqcjl."

iyjnj ujnj ljtjnmq djkdqj ko iyj dmtjcjoi mi iyj ircj, ewi iyj
gnjjirog mddjmnja ik hkcj bnkc m lqrc zkwiy ro mo wqlijn uyk yma
ywnnrja ez.

"r'tj yjmna iymi tkrhj ejbknj," lmra ykqcjl, limnrog akuo iyj
arcqz qri linjji. "oku, r ukoajn uyk iyj ajwhj iymi hkwqa ymtj
ejjo."


rrr.

r lqjdi mi emsjn linjji iymi orgyi, moa uj ujnj jogmgja wdko kwn
ikmli moa hkbbjj ro iyj cknorog uyjo iyj srog kb ekyjcrm nwlyja
roik iyj nkkc.

"zkw ymtj njmqqz gki ri!" yj hnrja, gnmldrog lyjnqkhs ykqcjl ez
jriyjn lykwqajn moa qkksrog jmgjnqz roik yrl bmhj.

"oki zji."

"ewi zkw ymtj ykdjl?"

"r ymtj ykdjl."

"iyjo, hkcj. r mc mqq rcdmirjohj ik ej gkoj."

"uj cwli ymtj m hme."

"ok, cz enkwgymc rl umrirog."

"iyjo iymi urqq lrcdqrbz cmiijnl." uj ajlhjoaja moa limnija kbb
kohj cknj bkn enrkoz qkagj.

"rnjoj maqjn rl cmnnrja," njcmnsja ykqcjl.

"cmnnrja! uyjo?"

"zjlijnamz."

"ewi ik uykc?"

"ik mo jogqrly qmuzjn omcja okniko."
