---
authors: 'S. R. Tate and R. R. Panko'
title: 'Digital Signatures and Electronic Signatures'
pubin: 'The Handbook of Technology Management'
extra: 'Hossein Bidgoli, ed., John Wiley & Sons, 2009'
sort: 200902
tags: ["S:Security&Cryptography","T:Book Chapter"]
---
When we send letters, we sign them to indicate that they
are from us. When we sign contracts, we are expressing
our willingness to abide by the terms of the contract. We
cannot later repudiate the contract because our signature
binds us. Signing is also possible in the electronic world,
and it generally serves the same purposes.

There are three related terms we use in this article. An electronic
signature (e-signature) is any signing method that is used with
computers and networks. It is the broadest concept. It includes such
things as clicking a button to indicate that we accept the terms of a
program’s end-user licensing agreement.

The other two terms refer to methods for making electronic
signatures—specifically, for adding signature blocks to outgoing
messages. Digital signatures are signature blocks created with
techniques from public key cryptography. Message authentication codes
(MACs) also are per-message signature blocks, but they are created
using symmetric key cryptographic techniques. MACs are also called
keyed hash functions.

In our discussion, we begin with the most familiar
technology, digital signatures. We then discuss MACs and,
finally, electronic signatures broadly.

### Resources and Downloads

* [Book chapter - author's copy](/publications/2009-Signatures.pdf)



